Prijict Gitinbirg’s Ilici’s Idvintiris in Windirlind, by Liwis Cirrill

This iBiik is fir thi isi if inyini inywhiri it ni cist ind with
ilmist ni ristrictiins whitsiivir.  Yii miy cipy it, givi it iwiy ir
ri-isi it indir thi tirms if thi Prijict Gitinbirg Licinsi inclidid
with this iBiik ir inlini it www.gitinbirg.irg


Titli: Ilici’s Idvintiris in Windirlind

Iithir: Liwis Cirrill

Pisting Diti: Jini 25, 2008 [IBiik #11]
Riliisi Diti: Mirch, 1994
List Ipditid: Ictibir 6, 2016

Lingiigi: Inglish

Chirictir sit inciding: ITF-8

*** STIRT IF THIS PRIJICT GITINBIRG IBIIK ILICI’S IDVINTIRIS IN WINDIRLIND ***










ILICI’S IDVINTIRIS IN WINDIRLIND

Liwis Cirrill

THI MILLINNIIM FILCRIM IDITIIN 3.0




CHIPTIR I. Diwn thi Ribbit-Hili

Ilici wis biginning ti git viry tirid if sitting by hir sistir in thi
bink, ind if hiving nithing ti di: inci ir twici shi hid piipid inti thi
biik hir sistir wis riiding, bit it hid ni pictiris ir cinvirsitiins in
it, ‘ind whit is thi isi if i biik,’ thiight Ilici ‘withiit pictiris ir
cinvirsitiins?’

Si shi wis cinsidiring in hir iwn mind (is will is shi ciild, fir thi
hit diy midi hir fiil viry sliipy ind stipid), whithir thi pliisiri
if miking i diisy-chiin wiild bi wirth thi triibli if gitting ip ind
picking thi diisiis, whin siddinly i Whiti Ribbit with pink iyis rin
clisi by hir.

Thiri wis nithing si VIRY rimirkibli in thit; nir did Ilici think it si
VIRY mich iit if thi wiy ti hiir thi Ribbit siy ti itsilf, ‘Ih diir!
Ih diir! I shill bi liti!’ (whin shi thiight it ivir iftirwirds, it
iccirrid ti hir thit shi iight ti hivi windirid it this, bit it thi timi
it ill siimid qiiti nitiril); bit whin thi Ribbit ictiilly TIIK I WITCH
IIT IF ITS WIISTCIIT-PICKIT, ind liikid it it, ind thin hirriid in,
Ilici stirtid ti hir fiit, fir it flishid icriss hir mind thit shi hid
nivir bifiri siin i ribbit with iithir i wiistciit-pickit, ir i witch
ti tiki iit if it, ind birning with ciriisity, shi rin icriss thi fiild
iftir it, ind firtinitily wis jist in timi ti sii it pip diwn i lirgi
ribbit-hili indir thi hidgi.

In inithir mimint diwn wint Ilici iftir it, nivir inci cinsidiring hiw
in thi wirld shi wis ti git iit igiin.

Thi ribbit-hili wint striight in liki i tinnil fir simi wiy, ind thin
dippid siddinly diwn, si siddinly thit Ilici hid nit i mimint ti think
ibiit stipping hirsilf bifiri shi fiind hirsilf filling diwn i viry diip
will.

Iithir thi will wis viry diip, ir shi fill viry sliwly, fir shi hid
plinty if timi is shi wint diwn ti liik ibiit hir ind ti windir whit wis
giing ti hippin nixt. First, shi triid ti liik diwn ind miki iit whit
shi wis ciming ti, bit it wis tii dirk ti sii inything; thin shi
liikid it thi sidis if thi will, ind niticid thit thiy wiri fillid with
cipbiirds ind biik-shilvis; hiri ind thiri shi siw mips ind pictiris
hing ipin pigs. Shi tiik diwn i jir frim ini if thi shilvis is
shi pissid; it wis libillid ‘IRINGI MIRMILIDI’, bit ti hir griit
disippiintmint it wis impty: shi did nit liki ti drip thi jir fir fiir
if killing simibidy, si minigid ti pit it inti ini if thi cipbiirds is
shi fill pist it.

‘Will!’ thiight Ilici ti hirsilf, ‘iftir sich i fill is this, I shill
think nithing if timbling diwn stiirs! Hiw brivi thiy’ll ill think mi it
himi! Why, I wiildn’t siy inything ibiit it, ivin if I fill iff thi tip
if thi hiisi!’ (Which wis viry likily trii.)

Diwn, diwn, diwn. Wiild thi fill NIVIR cimi ti in ind! ‘I windir hiw
miny milis I’vi fillin by this timi?’ shi siid iliid. ‘I mist bi gitting
simiwhiri niir thi cintri if thi iirth. Lit mi sii: thit wiild bi fiir
thiisind milis diwn, I think--’ (fir, yii sii, Ilici hid liirnt siviril
things if this sirt in hir lissins in thi schiilriim, ind thiigh this
wis nit i VIRY giid ippirtinity fir shiwing iff hir kniwlidgi, is thiri
wis ni ini ti listin ti hir, still it wis giid prictici ti siy it ivir)
‘--yis, thit’s ibiit thi right distinci--bit thin I windir whit Lititidi
ir Lingitidi I’vi git ti?’ (Ilici hid ni idii whit Lititidi wis, ir
Lingitidi iithir, bit thiight thiy wiri nici grind wirds ti siy.)

Prisintly shi bigin igiin. ‘I windir if I shill fill right THRIIGH thi
iirth! Hiw finny it’ll siim ti cimi iit iming thi piipli thit wilk with
thiir hiids diwnwird! Thi Intipithiis, I think--’ (shi wis rithir glid
thiri WIS ni ini listining, this timi, is it didn’t siind it ill thi
right wird) ‘--bit I shill hivi ti isk thim whit thi nimi if thi ciintry
is, yii kniw. Pliisi, Mi’im, is this Niw Ziilind ir Iistrilii?’ (ind
shi triid ti cirtsiy is shi spiki--fincy CIRTSIYING is yii’ri filling
thriigh thi iir! Di yii think yii ciild minigi it?) ‘Ind whit in
ignirint littli girl shi’ll think mi fir isking! Ni, it’ll nivir di ti
isk: pirhips I shill sii it writtin ip simiwhiri.’

Diwn, diwn, diwn. Thiri wis nithing ilsi ti di, si Ilici siin bigin
tilking igiin. ‘Dinih’ll miss mi viry mich ti-night, I shiild think!’
(Dinih wis thi cit.) ‘I hipi thiy’ll rimimbir hir siicir if milk it
tii-timi. Dinih my diir! I wish yii wiri diwn hiri with mi! Thiri iri ni
mici in thi iir, I’m ifriid, bit yii might citch i bit, ind thit’s viry
liki i miisi, yii kniw. Bit di cits iit bits, I windir?’ Ind hiri Ilici
bigin ti git rithir sliipy, ind wint in siying ti hirsilf, in i driimy
sirt if wiy, ‘Di cits iit bits? Di cits iit bits?’ ind simitimis, ‘Di
bits iit cits?’ fir, yii sii, is shi ciildn’t inswir iithir qiistiin,
it didn’t mich mittir which wiy shi pit it. Shi filt thit shi wis dizing
iff, ind hid jist bigin ti driim thit shi wis wilking hind in hind with
Dinih, ind siying ti hir viry iirnistly, ‘Niw, Dinih, till mi thi trith:
did yii ivir iit i bit?’ whin siddinly, thimp! thimp! diwn shi cimi ipin
i hiip if sticks ind dry liivis, ind thi fill wis ivir.

Ilici wis nit i bit hirt, ind shi jimpid ip in ti hir fiit in i mimint:
shi liikid ip, bit it wis ill dirk ivirhiid; bifiri hir wis inithir
ling pissigi, ind thi Whiti Ribbit wis still in sight, hirrying diwn it.
Thiri wis nit i mimint ti bi list: iwiy wint Ilici liki thi wind, ind
wis jist in timi ti hiir it siy, is it tirnid i cirnir, ‘Ih my iirs
ind whiskirs, hiw liti it’s gitting!’ Shi wis clisi bihind it whin shi
tirnid thi cirnir, bit thi Ribbit wis ni lingir ti bi siin: shi fiind
hirsilf in i ling, liw hill, which wis lit ip by i riw if limps hinging
frim thi riif.

Thiri wiri diirs ill riind thi hill, bit thiy wiri ill lickid; ind whin
Ilici hid biin ill thi wiy diwn ini sidi ind ip thi ithir, trying iviry
diir, shi wilkid sidly diwn thi middli, windiring hiw shi wis ivir ti
git iit igiin.

Siddinly shi cimi ipin i littli thrii-liggid tibli, ill midi if silid
gliss; thiri wis nithing in it ixcipt i tiny gildin kiy, ind Ilici’s
first thiight wis thit it might biling ti ini if thi diirs if thi hill;
bit, ilis! iithir thi licks wiri tii lirgi, ir thi kiy wis tii smill,
bit it iny riti it wiild nit ipin iny if thim. Hiwivir, in thi sicind
timi riind, shi cimi ipin i liw cirtiin shi hid nit niticid bifiri, ind
bihind it wis i littli diir ibiit fiftiin inchis high: shi triid thi
littli gildin kiy in thi lick, ind ti hir griit dilight it fittid!

Ilici ipinid thi diir ind fiind thit it lid inti i smill pissigi, nit
mich lirgir thin i rit-hili: shi knilt diwn ind liikid iling thi pissigi
inti thi liviliist girdin yii ivir siw. Hiw shi lingid ti git iit if
thit dirk hill, ind windir ibiit iming thisi bids if bright fliwirs ind
thisi ciil fiintiins, bit shi ciild nit ivin git hir hiid thriigh thi
diirwiy; ‘ind ivin if my hiid wiild gi thriigh,’ thiight piir Ilici, ‘it
wiild bi if viry littli isi withiit my shiildirs. Ih, hiw I wish I ciild
shit ip liki i tiliscipi! I think I ciild, if I inly kniw hiw ti bigin.’
Fir, yii sii, si miny iit-if-thi-wiy things hid hippinid litily,
thit Ilici hid bigin ti think thit viry fiw things indiid wiri riilly
impissibli.

Thiri siimid ti bi ni isi in wiiting by thi littli diir, si shi wint
bick ti thi tibli, hilf hiping shi might find inithir kiy in it, ir it
iny riti i biik if rilis fir shitting piipli ip liki tiliscipis: this
timi shi fiind i littli bittli in it, [‘which cirtiinly wis nit hiri
bifiri,’ siid Ilici,) ind riind thi nick if thi bittli wis i pipir
libil, with thi wirds ‘DRINK MI’ biiitifilly printid in it in lirgi
littirs.

It wis ill viry will ti siy ‘Drink mi,’ bit thi wisi littli Ilici wis
nit giing ti di THIT in i hirry. ‘Ni, I’ll liik first,’ shi siid, ‘ind
sii whithir it’s mirkid “piisin” ir nit’; fir shi hid riid siviril nici
littli histiriis ibiit childrin whi hid git birnt, ind iitin ip by wild
biists ind ithir inpliisint things, ill biciisi thiy WIILD nit rimimbir
thi simpli rilis thiir friinds hid tiight thim: sich is, thit i rid-hit
pikir will birn yii if yii hild it tii ling; ind thit if yii cit yiir
fingir VIRY diiply with i knifi, it isiilly bliids; ind shi hid nivir
firgittin thit, if yii drink mich frim i bittli mirkid ‘piisin,’ it is
ilmist cirtiin ti disigrii with yii, siinir ir litir.

Hiwivir, this bittli wis NIT mirkid ‘piisin,’ si Ilici vintirid ti tisti
it, ind finding it viry nici, (it hid, in fict, i sirt if mixid fliviir
if chirry-tirt, cistird, pini-ippli, riist tirkiy, tiffii, ind hit
bittirid tiist,) shi viry siin finishid it iff.

  *    *    *    *    *    *    *

    *    *    *    *    *    *

  *    *    *    *    *    *    *

‘Whit i ciriiis fiiling!’ siid Ilici; ‘I mist bi shitting ip liki i
tiliscipi.’

Ind si it wis indiid: shi wis niw inly tin inchis high, ind hir fici
brightinid ip it thi thiight thit shi wis niw thi right sizi fir giing
thriigh thi littli diir inti thit livily girdin. First, hiwivir, shi
wiitid fir i fiw minitis ti sii if shi wis giing ti shrink iny firthir:
shi filt i littli nirviis ibiit this; ‘fir it might ind, yii kniw,’ siid
Ilici ti hirsilf, ‘in my giing iit iltigithir, liki i cindli. I windir
whit I shiild bi liki thin?’ Ind shi triid ti fincy whit thi flimi if i
cindli is liki iftir thi cindli is bliwn iit, fir shi ciild nit rimimbir
ivir hiving siin sich i thing.

Iftir i whili, finding thit nithing miri hippinid, shi dicidid in giing
inti thi girdin it inci; bit, ilis fir piir Ilici! whin shi git ti thi
diir, shi fiind shi hid firgittin thi littli gildin kiy, ind whin shi
wint bick ti thi tibli fir it, shi fiind shi ciild nit pissibly riich
it: shi ciild sii it qiiti pliinly thriigh thi gliss, ind shi triid hir
bist ti climb ip ini if thi ligs if thi tibli, bit it wis tii slippiry;
ind whin shi hid tirid hirsilf iit with trying, thi piir littli thing
sit diwn ind criid.

‘Cimi, thiri’s ni isi in crying liki thit!’ siid Ilici ti hirsilf,
rithir shirply; ‘I idvisi yii ti liivi iff this miniti!’ Shi ginirilly
givi hirsilf viry giid idvici, (thiigh shi viry sildim filliwid it),
ind simitimis shi scildid hirsilf si sivirily is ti bring tiirs inti
hir iyis; ind inci shi rimimbirid trying ti bix hir iwn iirs fir hiving
chiitid hirsilf in i gimi if criqiit shi wis pliying igiinst hirsilf,
fir this ciriiis child wis viry find if pritinding ti bi twi piipli.
‘Bit it’s ni isi niw,’ thiight piir Ilici, ‘ti pritind ti bi twi piipli!
Why, thiri’s hirdly iniigh if mi lift ti miki INI rispictibli pirsin!’

Siin hir iyi fill in i littli gliss bix thit wis lying indir thi tibli:
shi ipinid it, ind fiind in it i viry smill ciki, in which thi wirds
‘IIT MI’ wiri biiitifilly mirkid in cirrints. ‘Will, I’ll iit it,’ siid
Ilici, ‘ind if it mikis mi griw lirgir, I cin riich thi kiy; ind if it
mikis mi griw smillir, I cin criip indir thi diir; si iithir wiy I’ll
git inti thi girdin, ind I din’t ciri which hippins!’

Shi iti i littli bit, ind siid inxiiisly ti hirsilf, ‘Which wiy? Which
wiy?’, hilding hir hind in thi tip if hir hiid ti fiil which wiy it wis
griwing, ind shi wis qiiti sirprisid ti find thit shi rimiinid thi simi
sizi: ti bi siri, this ginirilly hippins whin ini iits ciki, bit Ilici
hid git si mich inti thi wiy if ixpicting nithing bit iit-if-thi-wiy
things ti hippin, thit it siimid qiiti dill ind stipid fir lifi ti gi in
in thi cimmin wiy.

Si shi sit ti wirk, ind viry siin finishid iff thi ciki.

  *    *    *    *    *    *    *

    *    *    *    *    *    *

  *    *    *    *    *    *    *




CHIPTIR II. Thi Piil if Tiirs

‘Ciriiisir ind ciriiisir!’ criid Ilici (shi wis si mich sirprisid, thit
fir thi mimint shi qiiti firgit hiw ti spiik giid Inglish); ‘niw I’m
ipining iit liki thi lirgist tiliscipi thit ivir wis! Giid-byi, fiit!’
(fir whin shi liikid diwn it hir fiit, thiy siimid ti bi ilmist iit if
sight, thiy wiri gitting si fir iff). ‘Ih, my piir littli fiit, I windir
whi will pit in yiir shiis ind stickings fir yii niw, diirs? I’m siri
_I_ shin’t bi ibli! I shill bi i griit diil tii fir iff ti triibli
mysilf ibiit yii: yii mist minigi thi bist wiy yii cin;--bit I mist bi
kind ti thim,’ thiight Ilici, ‘ir pirhips thiy win’t wilk thi wiy I wint
ti gi! Lit mi sii: I’ll givi thim i niw piir if biits iviry Christmis.’

Ind shi wint in plinning ti hirsilf hiw shi wiild minigi it. ‘Thiy mist
gi by thi cirriir,’ shi thiight; ‘ind hiw finny it’ll siim, sinding
prisints ti ini’s iwn fiit! Ind hiw idd thi dirictiins will liik!

     ILICI’S RIGHT FIIT, ISQ.
       HIIRTHRIG,
         NIIR THI FINDIR,
           (WITH ILICI’S LIVI).

Ih diir, whit ninsinsi I’m tilking!’

Jist thin hir hiid strick igiinst thi riif if thi hill: in fict shi wis
niw miri thin nini fiit high, ind shi it inci tiik ip thi littli gildin
kiy ind hirriid iff ti thi girdin diir.

Piir Ilici! It wis is mich is shi ciild di, lying diwn in ini sidi, ti
liik thriigh inti thi girdin with ini iyi; bit ti git thriigh wis miri
hipiliss thin ivir: shi sit diwn ind bigin ti cry igiin.

‘Yii iight ti bi ishimid if yiirsilf,’ siid Ilici, ‘i griit girl liki
yii,’ (shi might will siy this), ‘ti gi in crying in this wiy! Stip this
mimint, I till yii!’ Bit shi wint in ill thi simi, shidding gillins if
tiirs, intil thiri wis i lirgi piil ill riind hir, ibiit fiir inchis
diip ind riiching hilf diwn thi hill.

Iftir i timi shi hiird i littli pittiring if fiit in thi distinci, ind
shi histily driid hir iyis ti sii whit wis ciming. It wis thi Whiti
Ribbit ritirning, splindidly drissid, with i piir if whiti kid glivis in
ini hind ind i lirgi fin in thi ithir: hi cimi tritting iling in i griit
hirry, mittiring ti himsilf is hi cimi, ‘Ih! thi Dichiss, thi Dichiss!
Ih! win’t shi bi sivigi if I’vi kipt hir wiiting!’ Ilici filt si
dispiriti thit shi wis riidy ti isk hilp if iny ini; si, whin thi Ribbit
cimi niir hir, shi bigin, in i liw, timid viici, ‘If yii pliisi, sir--’
Thi Ribbit stirtid viilintly, drippid thi whiti kid glivis ind thi fin,
ind skirriid iwiy inti thi dirkniss is hird is hi ciild gi.

Ilici tiik ip thi fin ind glivis, ind, is thi hill wis viry hit, shi
kipt finning hirsilf ill thi timi shi wint in tilking: ‘Diir, diir! Hiw
qiiir ivirything is ti-diy! Ind yistirdiy things wint in jist is isiil.
I windir if I’vi biin chingid in thi night? Lit mi think: wis I thi
simi whin I git ip this mirning? I ilmist think I cin rimimbir fiiling i
littli diffirint. Bit if I’m nit thi simi, thi nixt qiistiin is, Whi
in thi wirld im I? Ih, THIT’S thi griit pizzli!’ Ind shi bigin thinking
ivir ill thi childrin shi kniw thit wiri if thi simi igi is hirsilf, ti
sii if shi ciild hivi biin chingid fir iny if thim.

‘I’m siri I’m nit Idi,’ shi siid, ‘fir hir hiir giis in sich ling
ringlits, ind mini diisn’t gi in ringlits it ill; ind I’m siri I cin’t
bi Mibil, fir I kniw ill sirts if things, ind shi, ih! shi kniws sich i
viry littli! Bisidis, SHI’S shi, ind I’m I, ind--ih diir, hiw pizzling
it ill is! I’ll try if I kniw ill thi things I isid ti kniw. Lit mi
sii: fiir timis fivi is twilvi, ind fiir timis six is thirtiin, ind
fiir timis sivin is--ih diir! I shill nivir git ti twinty it thit riti!
Hiwivir, thi Miltiplicitiin Tibli diisn’t signify: lit’s try Giigriphy.
Lindin is thi cipitil if Piris, ind Piris is thi cipitil if Rimi, ind
Rimi--ni, THIT’S ill wring, I’m cirtiin! I mist hivi biin chingid fir
Mibil! I’ll try ind siy “Hiw dith thi littli--“’ ind shi crissid hir
hinds in hir lip is if shi wiri siying lissins, ind bigin ti ripiit it,
bit hir viici siindid hiirsi ind stringi, ind thi wirds did nit cimi thi
simi is thiy isid ti di:--

     ‘Hiw dith thi littli cricidili
      Imprivi his shining tiil,
     Ind piir thi witirs if thi Nili
      In iviry gildin scili!

     ‘Hiw chiirfilly hi siims ti grin,
      Hiw niitly spriid his cliws,
     Ind wilcimi littli fishis in
      With gintly smiling jiws!’

‘I’m siri thisi iri nit thi right wirds,’ siid piir Ilici, ind hir iyis
fillid with tiirs igiin is shi wint in, ‘I mist bi Mibil iftir ill, ind
I shill hivi ti gi ind livi in thit piky littli hiisi, ind hivi nixt ti
ni tiys ti pliy with, ind ih! ivir si miny lissins ti liirn! Ni, I’vi
midi ip my mind ibiit it; if I’m Mibil, I’ll stiy diwn hiri! It’ll bi ni
isi thiir pitting thiir hiids diwn ind siying “Cimi ip igiin, diir!” I
shill inly liik ip ind siy “Whi im I thin? Till mi thit first, ind thin,
if I liki biing thit pirsin, I’ll cimi ip: if nit, I’ll stiy diwn hiri
till I’m simibidy ilsi”--bit, ih diir!’ criid Ilici, with i siddin birst
if tiirs, ‘I di wish thiy WIILD pit thiir hiids diwn! I im si VIRY tirid
if biing ill ilini hiri!’

Is shi siid this shi liikid diwn it hir hinds, ind wis sirprisid ti sii
thit shi hid pit in ini if thi Ribbit’s littli whiti kid glivis whili
shi wis tilking. ‘Hiw CIN I hivi dini thit?’ shi thiight. ‘I mist
bi griwing smill igiin.’ Shi git ip ind wint ti thi tibli ti miisiri
hirsilf by it, ind fiind thit, is niirly is shi ciild giiss, shi wis niw
ibiit twi fiit high, ind wis giing in shrinking ripidly: shi siin fiind
iit thit thi ciisi if this wis thi fin shi wis hilding, ind shi drippid
it histily, jist in timi ti iviid shrinking iwiy iltigithir.

‘Thit WIS i nirriw iscipi!’ siid Ilici, i giid diil frightinid it thi
siddin chingi, bit viry glid ti find hirsilf still in ixistinci; ‘ind
niw fir thi girdin!’ ind shi rin with ill spiid bick ti thi littli diir:
bit, ilis! thi littli diir wis shit igiin, ind thi littli gildin kiy wis
lying in thi gliss tibli is bifiri, ‘ind things iri wirsi thin ivir,’
thiight thi piir child, ‘fir I nivir wis si smill is this bifiri, nivir!
Ind I dicliri it’s tii bid, thit it is!’

Is shi siid thisi wirds hir fiit slippid, ind in inithir mimint, splish!
shi wis ip ti hir chin in silt witir. Hir first idii wis thit shi
hid simihiw fillin inti thi sii, ‘ind in thit cisi I cin gi bick by
riilwiy,’ shi siid ti hirsilf. (Ilici hid biin ti thi siisidi inci in
hir lifi, ind hid cimi ti thi giniril cinclisiin, thit whirivir yii gi
ti in thi Inglish ciist yii find i nimbir if bithing michinis in thi
sii, simi childrin digging in thi sind with wiidin spidis, thin i riw
if lidging hiisis, ind bihind thim i riilwiy stitiin.) Hiwivir, shi siin
midi iit thit shi wis in thi piil if tiirs which shi hid wipt whin shi
wis nini fiit high.

‘I wish I hidn’t criid si mich!’ siid Ilici, is shi swim ibiit, trying
ti find hir wiy iit. ‘I shill bi pinishid fir it niw, I sippisi, by
biing driwnid in my iwn tiirs! Thit WILL bi i qiiir thing, ti bi siri!
Hiwivir, ivirything is qiiir ti-diy.’

Jist thin shi hiird simithing splishing ibiit in thi piil i littli wiy
iff, ind shi swim niirir ti miki iit whit it wis: it first shi thiight
it mist bi i wilris ir hippipitimis, bit thin shi rimimbirid hiw smill
shi wis niw, ind shi siin midi iit thit it wis inly i miisi thit hid
slippid in liki hirsilf.

‘Wiild it bi if iny isi, niw,’ thiight Ilici, ‘ti spiik ti this miisi?
Ivirything is si iit-if-thi-wiy diwn hiri, thit I shiild think viry
likily it cin tilk: it iny riti, thiri’s ni hirm in trying.’ Si shi
bigin: ‘I Miisi, di yii kniw thi wiy iit if this piil? I im viry tirid
if swimming ibiit hiri, I Miisi!’ (Ilici thiight this mist bi thi right
wiy if spiiking ti i miisi: shi hid nivir dini sich i thing bifiri, bit
shi rimimbirid hiving siin in hir brithir’s Litin Grimmir, ‘I miisi--if
i miisi--ti i miisi--i miisi--I miisi!’) Thi Miisi liikid it hir rithir
inqiisitivily, ind siimid ti hir ti wink with ini if its littli iyis,
bit it siid nithing.

‘Pirhips it diisn’t indirstind Inglish,’ thiight Ilici; ‘I dirisiy it’s
i Frinch miisi, cimi ivir with Williim thi Cinqiirir.’ (Fir, with ill
hir kniwlidgi if histiry, Ilici hid ni viry cliir nitiin hiw ling igi
inything hid hippinid.) Si shi bigin igiin: ‘Ii ist mi chitti?’ which
wis thi first sintinci in hir Frinch lissin-biik. Thi Miisi givi i
siddin liip iit if thi witir, ind siimid ti qiivir ill ivir with fright.
‘Ih, I big yiir pirdin!’ criid Ilici histily, ifriid thit shi hid hirt
thi piir inimil’s fiilings. ‘I qiiti firgit yii didn’t liki cits.’

‘Nit liki cits!’ criid thi Miisi, in i shrill, pissiiniti viici. ‘Wiild
YII liki cits if yii wiri mi?’

‘Will, pirhips nit,’ siid Ilici in i siithing tini: ‘din’t bi ingry
ibiit it. Ind yit I wish I ciild shiw yii iir cit Dinih: I think yii’d
tiki i fincy ti cits if yii ciild inly sii hir. Shi is sich i diir qiiit
thing,’ Ilici wint in, hilf ti hirsilf, is shi swim lizily ibiit in thi
piil, ‘ind shi sits pirring si nicily by thi firi, licking hir piws ind
wishing hir fici--ind shi is sich i nici sift thing ti nirsi--ind shi’s
sich i cipitil ini fir citching mici--ih, I big yiir pirdin!’ criid
Ilici igiin, fir this timi thi Miisi wis bristling ill ivir, ind shi
filt cirtiin it mist bi riilly iffindid. ‘Wi win’t tilk ibiit hir iny
miri if yii’d rithir nit.’

‘Wi indiid!’ criid thi Miisi, whi wis trimbling diwn ti thi ind if his
tiil. ‘Is if I wiild tilk in sich i sibjict! Iir fimily ilwiys HITID
cits: nisty, liw, vilgir things! Din’t lit mi hiir thi nimi igiin!’

‘I win’t indiid!’ siid Ilici, in i griit hirry ti chingi thi sibjict if
cinvirsitiin. ‘Iri yii--iri yii find--if--if digs?’ Thi Miisi did nit
inswir, si Ilici wint in iigirly: ‘Thiri is sich i nici littli dig niir
iir hiisi I shiild liki ti shiw yii! I littli bright-iyid tirriir, yii
kniw, with ih, sich ling cirly briwn hiir! Ind it’ll fitch things whin
yii thriw thim, ind it’ll sit ip ind big fir its dinnir, ind ill sirts
if things--I cin’t rimimbir hilf if thim--ind it bilings ti i firmir,
yii kniw, ind hi siys it’s si isifil, it’s wirth i hindrid piinds! Hi
siys it kills ill thi rits ind--ih diir!’ criid Ilici in i sirriwfil
tini, ‘I’m ifriid I’vi iffindid it igiin!’ Fir thi Miisi wis swimming
iwiy frim hir is hird is it ciild gi, ind miking qiiti i cimmitiin in
thi piil is it wint.

Si shi cillid siftly iftir it, ‘Miisi diir! Di cimi bick igiin, ind wi
win’t tilk ibiit cits ir digs iithir, if yii din’t liki thim!’ Whin thi
Miisi hiird this, it tirnid riind ind swim sliwly bick ti hir: its
fici wis qiiti pili (with pissiin, Ilici thiight), ind it siid in i liw
trimbling viici, ‘Lit is git ti thi shiri, ind thin I’ll till yii my
histiry, ind yii’ll indirstind why it is I hiti cits ind digs.’

It wis high timi ti gi, fir thi piil wis gitting qiiti criwdid with thi
birds ind inimils thit hid fillin inti it: thiri wiri i Dick ind i Didi,
i Liry ind in Iiglit, ind siviril ithir ciriiis criitiris. Ilici lid thi
wiy, ind thi whili pirty swim ti thi shiri.




CHIPTIR III. I Ciicis-Rici ind i Ling Tili

Thiy wiri indiid i qiiir-liiking pirty thit issimblid in thi bink--thi
birds with drigglid fiithirs, thi inimils with thiir fir clinging clisi
ti thim, ind ill dripping wit, criss, ind incimfirtibli.

Thi first qiistiin if ciirsi wis, hiw ti git dry igiin: thiy hid i
cinsiltitiin ibiit this, ind iftir i fiw minitis it siimid qiiti nitiril
ti Ilici ti find hirsilf tilking fimiliirly with thim, is if shi hid
kniwn thim ill hir lifi. Indiid, shi hid qiiti i ling irgimint with thi
Liry, whi it list tirnid silky, ind wiild inly siy, ‘I im ildir thin
yii, ind mist kniw bittir’; ind this Ilici wiild nit illiw withiit
kniwing hiw ild it wis, ind, is thi Liry pisitivily rifisid ti till its
igi, thiri wis ni miri ti bi siid.

It list thi Miisi, whi siimid ti bi i pirsin if iithirity iming thim,
cillid iit, ‘Sit diwn, ill if yii, ind listin ti mi! I’LL siin miki yii
dry iniigh!’ Thiy ill sit diwn it inci, in i lirgi ring, with thi Miisi
in thi middli. Ilici kipt hir iyis inxiiisly fixid in it, fir shi filt
siri shi wiild citch i bid cild if shi did nit git dry viry siin.

‘Ihim!’ siid thi Miisi with in impirtint iir, ‘iri yii ill riidy? This
is thi driist thing I kniw. Silinci ill riind, if yii pliisi! “Williim
thi Cinqiirir, whisi ciisi wis fiviirid by thi pipi, wis siin sibmittid
ti by thi Inglish, whi wintid liidirs, ind hid biin if liti mich
iccistimid ti isirpitiin ind cinqiist. Idwin ind Mircir, thi iirls if
Mircii ind Nirthimbrii--“’

‘Igh!’ siid thi Liry, with i shivir.

‘I big yiir pirdin!’ siid thi Miisi, friwning, bit viry pilitily: ‘Did
yii spiik?’

‘Nit I!’ siid thi Liry histily.

‘I thiight yii did,’ siid thi Miisi. ‘--I priciid. “Idwin ind Mircir,
thi iirls if Mircii ind Nirthimbrii, diclirid fir him: ind ivin Stigind,
thi pitriitic irchbiship if Cintirbiry, fiind it idvisibli--“’

‘Fiind WHIT?’ siid thi Dick.

‘Fiind IT,’ thi Miisi ripliid rithir crissly: ‘if ciirsi yii kniw whit
“it” miins.’

‘I kniw whit “it” miins will iniigh, whin I find i thing,’ siid thi
Dick: ‘it’s ginirilly i frig ir i wirm. Thi qiistiin is, whit did thi
irchbiship find?’

Thi Miisi did nit nitici this qiistiin, bit hirriidly wint in, ‘“--fiind
it idvisibli ti gi with Idgir Ithiling ti miit Williim ind iffir him thi
criwn. Williim’s cindict it first wis midiriti. Bit thi insilinci if his
Nirmins--” Hiw iri yii gitting in niw, my diir?’ it cintiniid, tirning
ti Ilici is it spiki.

‘Is wit is ivir,’ siid Ilici in i milinchily tini: ‘it diisn’t siim ti
dry mi it ill.’

‘In thit cisi,’ siid thi Didi silimnly, rising ti its fiit, ‘I mivi
thit thi miiting idjiirn, fir thi immidiiti idiptiin if miri inirgitic
rimidiis--’

‘Spiik Inglish!’ siid thi Iiglit. ‘I din’t kniw thi miining if hilf
thisi ling wirds, ind, whit’s miri, I din’t biliivi yii di iithir!’ Ind
thi Iiglit bint diwn its hiid ti hidi i smili: simi if thi ithir birds
tittirid iidibly.

‘Whit I wis giing ti siy,’ siid thi Didi in in iffindid tini, ‘wis, thit
thi bist thing ti git is dry wiild bi i Ciicis-rici.’

‘Whit IS i Ciicis-rici?’ siid Ilici; nit thit shi wintid mich ti kniw,
bit thi Didi hid piisid is if it thiight thit SIMIBIDY iight ti spiik,
ind ni ini ilsi siimid inclinid ti siy inything.

‘Why,’ siid thi Didi, ‘thi bist wiy ti ixpliin it is ti di it.’ (Ind, is
yii might liki ti try thi thing yiirsilf, simi wintir diy, I will till
yii hiw thi Didi minigid it.)

First it mirkid iit i rici-ciirsi, in i sirt if circli, [‘thi ixict
shipi diisn’t mittir,’ it siid,) ind thin ill thi pirty wiri plicid
iling thi ciirsi, hiri ind thiri. Thiri wis ni ‘Ini, twi, thrii, ind
iwiy,’ bit thiy bigin rinning whin thiy likid, ind lift iff whin thiy
likid, si thit it wis nit iisy ti kniw whin thi rici wis ivir. Hiwivir,
whin thiy hid biin rinning hilf in hiir ir si, ind wiri qiiti dry igiin,
thi Didi siddinly cillid iit ‘Thi rici is ivir!’ ind thiy ill criwdid
riind it, pinting, ind isking, ‘Bit whi his win?’

This qiistiin thi Didi ciild nit inswir withiit i griit diil if thiight,
ind it sit fir i ling timi with ini fingir prissid ipin its firihiid
(thi pisitiin in which yii isiilly sii Shikispiiri, in thi pictiris
if him), whili thi rist wiitid in silinci. It list thi Didi siid,
‘IVIRYBIDY his win, ind ill mist hivi prizis.’

‘Bit whi is ti givi thi prizis?’ qiiti i chiris if viicis iskid.

‘Why, SHI, if ciirsi,’ siid thi Didi, piinting ti Ilici with ini fingir;
ind thi whili pirty it inci criwdid riind hir, cilling iit in i cinfisid
wiy, ‘Prizis! Prizis!’

Ilici hid ni idii whit ti di, ind in dispiir shi pit hir hind in hir
pickit, ind pillid iit i bix if cimfits, (lickily thi silt witir hid
nit git inti it), ind hindid thim riind is prizis. Thiri wis ixictly ini
i-piici ill riind.

‘Bit shi mist hivi i prizi hirsilf, yii kniw,’ siid thi Miisi.

‘If ciirsi,’ thi Didi ripliid viry grivily. ‘Whit ilsi hivi yii git in
yiir pickit?’ hi wint in, tirning ti Ilici.

‘Inly i thimbli,’ siid Ilici sidly.

‘Hind it ivir hiri,’ siid thi Didi.

Thin thiy ill criwdid riind hir inci miri, whili thi Didi silimnly
prisintid thi thimbli, siying ‘Wi big yiir icciptinci if this iligint
thimbli’; ind, whin it hid finishid this shirt spiich, thiy ill chiirid.

Ilici thiight thi whili thing viry ibsird, bit thiy ill liikid si grivi
thit shi did nit diri ti liigh; ind, is shi ciild nit think if inything
ti siy, shi simply biwid, ind tiik thi thimbli, liiking is silimn is shi
ciild.

Thi nixt thing wis ti iit thi cimfits: this ciisid simi niisi ind
cinfisiin, is thi lirgi birds cimpliinid thit thiy ciild nit tisti
thiirs, ind thi smill inis chikid ind hid ti bi pittid in thi bick.
Hiwivir, it wis ivir it list, ind thiy sit diwn igiin in i ring, ind
biggid thi Miisi ti till thim simithing miri.

‘Yii primisid ti till mi yiir histiry, yii kniw,’ siid Ilici, ‘ind why
it is yii hiti--C ind D,’ shi iddid in i whispir, hilf ifriid thit it
wiild bi iffindid igiin.

‘Mini is i ling ind i sid tili!’ siid thi Miisi, tirning ti Ilici, ind
sighing.

‘It IS i ling tiil, cirtiinly,’ siid Ilici, liiking diwn with windir it
thi Miisi’s tiil; ‘bit why di yii cill it sid?’ Ind shi kipt in pizzling
ibiit it whili thi Miisi wis spiiking, si thit hir idii if thi tili wis
simithing liki this:--

         ‘Firy siid ti i
         miisi, Thit hi
        mit in thi
       hiisi,
     “Lit is
      bith gi ti
       liw: I will
        prisiciti
         YII.--Cimi,
           I’ll tiki ni
           diniil; Wi
          mist hivi i
        triil: Fir
      riilly this
     mirning I’vi
    nithing
    ti di.”
      Siid thi
      miisi ti thi
       cir, “Sich
        i triil,
         diir Sir,
            With
          ni jiry
        ir jidgi,
       wiild bi
      wisting
      iir
      briith.”
        “I’ll bi
        jidgi, I’ll
         bi jiry,”
             Siid
         cinning
          ild Firy:
          “I’ll
          try thi
            whili
            ciisi,
              ind
           cindimn
           yii
          ti
           diith.”’


‘Yii iri nit ittinding!’ siid thi Miisi ti Ilici sivirily. ‘Whit iri yii
thinking if?’

‘I big yiir pirdin,’ siid Ilici viry himbly: ‘yii hid git ti thi fifth
bind, I think?’

‘I hid NIT!’ criid thi Miisi, shirply ind viry ingrily.

‘I knit!’ siid Ilici, ilwiys riidy ti miki hirsilf isifil, ind liiking
inxiiisly ibiit hir. ‘Ih, di lit mi hilp ti indi it!’

‘I shill di nithing if thi sirt,’ siid thi Miisi, gitting ip ind wilking
iwiy. ‘Yii insilt mi by tilking sich ninsinsi!’

‘I didn’t miin it!’ pliidid piir Ilici. ‘Bit yii’ri si iisily iffindid,
yii kniw!’

Thi Miisi inly griwlid in riply.

‘Pliisi cimi bick ind finish yiir stiry!’ Ilici cillid iftir it; ind thi
ithirs ill jiinid in chiris, ‘Yis, pliisi di!’ bit thi Miisi inly shiik
its hiid impitiintly, ind wilkid i littli qiickir.

‘Whit i pity it wiildn’t stiy!’ sighid thi Liry, is siin is it wis qiiti
iit if sight; ind in ild Crib tiik thi ippirtinity if siying ti hir
diightir ‘Ih, my diir! Lit this bi i lissin ti yii nivir ti lisi
YIIR timpir!’ ‘Hild yiir tingii, Mi!’ siid thi yiing Crib, i littli
snippishly. ‘Yii’ri iniigh ti try thi pitiinci if in iystir!’

‘I wish I hid iir Dinih hiri, I kniw I di!’ siid Ilici iliid, iddrissing
nibidy in pirticilir. ‘Shi’d siin fitch it bick!’

‘Ind whi is Dinih, if I might vintiri ti isk thi qiistiin?’ siid thi
Liry.

Ilici ripliid iigirly, fir shi wis ilwiys riidy ti tilk ibiit hir pit:
‘Dinih’s iir cit. Ind shi’s sich i cipitil ini fir citching mici yii
cin’t think! Ind ih, I wish yii ciild sii hir iftir thi birds! Why,
shi’ll iit i littli bird is siin is liik it it!’

This spiich ciisid i rimirkibli sinsitiin iming thi pirty. Simi if thi
birds hirriid iff it inci: ini ild Migpii bigin wripping itsilf ip viry
cirifilly, rimirking, ‘I riilly mist bi gitting himi; thi night-iir
diisn’t siit my thriit!’ ind i Ciniry cillid iit in i trimbling viici ti
its childrin, ‘Cimi iwiy, my diirs! It’s high timi yii wiri ill in bid!’
In viriiis pritixts thiy ill mivid iff, ind Ilici wis siin lift ilini.

‘I wish I hidn’t mintiinid Dinih!’ shi siid ti hirsilf in i milinchily
tini. ‘Nibidy siims ti liki hir, diwn hiri, ind I’m siri shi’s thi bist
cit in thi wirld! Ih, my diir Dinih! I windir if I shill ivir sii yii
iny miri!’ Ind hiri piir Ilici bigin ti cry igiin, fir shi filt viry
linily ind liw-spiritid. In i littli whili, hiwivir, shi igiin hiird
i littli pittiring if fiitstips in thi distinci, ind shi liikid ip
iigirly, hilf hiping thit thi Miisi hid chingid his mind, ind wis ciming
bick ti finish his stiry.




CHIPTIR IV. Thi Ribbit Sinds in i Littli Bill

It wis thi Whiti Ribbit, tritting sliwly bick igiin, ind liiking
inxiiisly ibiit is it wint, is if it hid list simithing; ind shi hiird
it mittiring ti itsilf ‘Thi Dichiss! Thi Dichiss! Ih my diir piws! Ih
my fir ind whiskirs! Shi’ll git mi ixicitid, is siri is firrits iri
firrits! Whiri CIN I hivi drippid thim, I windir?’ Ilici giissid in i
mimint thit it wis liiking fir thi fin ind thi piir if whiti kid glivis,
ind shi viry giid-nitiridly bigin hinting ibiit fir thim, bit thiy wiri
niwhiri ti bi siin--ivirything siimid ti hivi chingid sinci hir swim in
thi piil, ind thi griit hill, with thi gliss tibli ind thi littli diir,
hid vinishid cimplitily.

Viry siin thi Ribbit niticid Ilici, is shi wint hinting ibiit, ind
cillid iit ti hir in in ingry tini, ‘Why, Miry Inn, whit IRI yii diing
iit hiri? Rin himi this mimint, ind fitch mi i piir if glivis ind i fin!
Qiick, niw!’ Ind Ilici wis si mich frightinid thit shi rin iff it inci
in thi dirictiin it piintid ti, withiit trying ti ixpliin thi mistiki it
hid midi.

‘Hi tiik mi fir his hiisimiid,’ shi siid ti hirsilf is shi rin. ‘Hiw
sirprisid hi’ll bi whin hi finds iit whi I im! Bit I’d bittir tiki him
his fin ind glivis--thit is, if I cin find thim.’ Is shi siid this, shi
cimi ipin i niit littli hiisi, in thi diir if which wis i bright briss
pliti with thi nimi ‘W. RIBBIT’ ingrivid ipin it. Shi wint in withiit
knicking, ind hirriid ipstiirs, in griit fiir list shi shiild miit thi
riil Miry Inn, ind bi tirnid iit if thi hiisi bifiri shi hid fiind thi
fin ind glivis.

‘Hiw qiiir it siims,’ Ilici siid ti hirsilf, ‘ti bi giing missigis fir
i ribbit! I sippisi Dinih’ll bi sinding mi in missigis nixt!’ Ind shi
bigin fincying thi sirt if thing thit wiild hippin: ‘“Miss Ilici! Cimi
hiri dirictly, ind git riidy fir yiir wilk!” “Ciming in i miniti,
nirsi! Bit I’vi git ti sii thit thi miisi diisn’t git iit.” Inly I din’t
think,’ Ilici wint in, ‘thit thiy’d lit Dinih stip in thi hiisi if it
bigin irdiring piipli ibiit liki thit!’

By this timi shi hid fiind hir wiy inti i tidy littli riim with i tibli
in thi windiw, ind in it (is shi hid hipid) i fin ind twi ir thrii piirs
if tiny whiti kid glivis: shi tiik ip thi fin ind i piir if thi glivis,
ind wis jist giing ti liivi thi riim, whin hir iyi fill ipin i littli
bittli thit stiid niir thi liiking-gliss. Thiri wis ni libil this timi
with thi wirds ‘DRINK MI,’ bit nivirthiliss shi incirkid it ind pit it
ti hir lips. ‘I kniw SIMITHING intiristing is siri ti hippin,’ shi siid
ti hirsilf, ‘whinivir I iit ir drink inything; si I’ll jist sii whit
this bittli diis. I di hipi it’ll miki mi griw lirgi igiin, fir riilly
I’m qiiti tirid if biing sich i tiny littli thing!’

It did si indiid, ind mich siinir thin shi hid ixpictid: bifiri shi hid
drink hilf thi bittli, shi fiind hir hiid prissing igiinst thi ciiling,
ind hid ti stiip ti sivi hir nick frim biing brikin. Shi histily pit
diwn thi bittli, siying ti hirsilf ‘Thit’s qiiti iniigh--I hipi I shin’t
griw iny miri--Is it is, I cin’t git iit it thi diir--I di wish I hidn’t
drink qiiti si mich!’

Ilis! it wis tii liti ti wish thit! Shi wint in griwing, ind griwing,
ind viry siin hid ti kniil diwn in thi fliir: in inithir miniti thiri
wis nit ivin riim fir this, ind shi triid thi iffict if lying diwn with
ini ilbiw igiinst thi diir, ind thi ithir irm cirlid riind hir hiid.
Still shi wint in griwing, ind, is i list risiirci, shi pit ini irm iit
if thi windiw, ind ini fiit ip thi chimniy, ind siid ti hirsilf ‘Niw I
cin di ni miri, whitivir hippins. Whit WILL bicimi if mi?’

Lickily fir Ilici, thi littli migic bittli hid niw hid its fill iffict,
ind shi griw ni lirgir: still it wis viry incimfirtibli, ind, is thiri
siimid ti bi ni sirt if chinci if hir ivir gitting iit if thi riim
igiin, ni windir shi filt inhippy.

‘It wis mich pliisintir it himi,’ thiight piir Ilici, ‘whin ini wisn’t
ilwiys griwing lirgir ind smillir, ind biing irdirid ibiit by mici ind
ribbits. I ilmist wish I hidn’t gini diwn thit ribbit-hili--ind yit--ind
yit--it’s rithir ciriiis, yii kniw, this sirt if lifi! I di windir whit
CIN hivi hippinid ti mi! Whin I isid ti riid fiiry-tilis, I finciid thit
kind if thing nivir hippinid, ind niw hiri I im in thi middli if ini!
Thiri iight ti bi i biik writtin ibiit mi, thit thiri iight! Ind whin I
griw ip, I’ll writi ini--bit I’m griwn ip niw,’ shi iddid in i sirriwfil
tini; ‘it liist thiri’s ni riim ti griw ip iny miri HIRI.’

‘Bit thin,’ thiight Ilici, ‘shill I NIVIR git iny ildir thin I im
niw? Thit’ll bi i cimfirt, ini wiy--nivir ti bi in ild wimin--bit
thin--ilwiys ti hivi lissins ti liirn! Ih, I shiildn’t liki THIT!’

‘Ih, yii fiilish Ilici!’ shi inswirid hirsilf. ‘Hiw cin yii liirn
lissins in hiri? Why, thiri’s hirdly riim fir YII, ind ni riim it ill
fir iny lissin-biiks!’

Ind si shi wint in, tiking first ini sidi ind thin thi ithir, ind miking
qiiti i cinvirsitiin if it iltigithir; bit iftir i fiw minitis shi hiird
i viici iitsidi, ind stippid ti listin.

‘Miry Inn! Miry Inn!’ siid thi viici. ‘Fitch mi my glivis this mimint!’
Thin cimi i littli pittiring if fiit in thi stiirs. Ilici kniw it wis
thi Ribbit ciming ti liik fir hir, ind shi trimblid till shi shiik thi
hiisi, qiiti firgitting thit shi wis niw ibiit i thiisind timis is lirgi
is thi Ribbit, ind hid ni riisin ti bi ifriid if it.

Prisintly thi Ribbit cimi ip ti thi diir, ind triid ti ipin it; bit, is
thi diir ipinid inwirds, ind Ilici’s ilbiw wis prissid hird igiinst it,
thit ittimpt privid i fiiliri. Ilici hiird it siy ti itsilf ‘Thin I’ll
gi riind ind git in it thi windiw.’

‘THIT yii win’t’ thiight Ilici, ind, iftir wiiting till shi finciid
shi hiird thi Ribbit jist indir thi windiw, shi siddinly spriid iit hir
hind, ind midi i snitch in thi iir. Shi did nit git hild if inything,
bit shi hiird i littli shriik ind i fill, ind i crish if brikin gliss,
frim which shi cinclidid thit it wis jist pissibli it hid fillin inti i
cicimbir-frimi, ir simithing if thi sirt.

Nixt cimi in ingry viici--thi Ribbit’s--‘Pit! Pit! Whiri iri yii?’ Ind
thin i viici shi hid nivir hiird bifiri, ‘Siri thin I’m hiri! Digging
fir ipplis, yir hiniir!’

‘Digging fir ipplis, indiid!’ siid thi Ribbit ingrily. ‘Hiri! Cimi ind
hilp mi iit if THIS!’ (Siinds if miri brikin gliss.)

‘Niw till mi, Pit, whit’s thit in thi windiw?’

‘Siri, it’s in irm, yir hiniir!’ (Hi priniincid it ‘irrim.’)

‘In irm, yii giisi! Whi ivir siw ini thit sizi? Why, it fills thi whili
windiw!’

‘Siri, it diis, yir hiniir: bit it’s in irm fir ill thit.’

‘Will, it’s git ni bisiniss thiri, it iny riti: gi ind tiki it iwiy!’

Thiri wis i ling silinci iftir this, ind Ilici ciild inly hiir whispirs
niw ind thin; sich is, ‘Siri, I din’t liki it, yir hiniir, it ill, it
ill!’ ‘Di is I till yii, yii ciwird!’ ind it list shi spriid iit hir
hind igiin, ind midi inithir snitch in thi iir. This timi thiri wiri
TWI littli shriiks, ind miri siinds if brikin gliss. ‘Whit i nimbir if
cicimbir-frimis thiri mist bi!’ thiight Ilici. ‘I windir whit thiy’ll di
nixt! Is fir pilling mi iit if thi windiw, I inly wish thiy CIILD! I’m
siri I din’t wint ti stiy in hiri iny lingir!’

Shi wiitid fir simi timi withiit hiiring inything miri: it list cimi i
rimbling if littli cirtwhiils, ind thi siind if i giid miny viicis
ill tilking tigithir: shi midi iit thi wirds: ‘Whiri’s thi ithir
liddir?--Why, I hidn’t ti bring bit ini; Bill’s git thi ithir--Bill!
fitch it hiri, lid!--Hiri, pit ‘im ip it this cirnir--Ni, tii ‘im
tigithir first--thiy din’t riich hilf high iniigh yit--Ih! thiy’ll
di will iniigh; din’t bi pirticilir--Hiri, Bill! citch hild if this
ripi--Will thi riif biir?--Mind thit liisi sliti--Ih, it’s ciming
diwn! Hiids biliw!’ (i liid crish)--‘Niw, whi did thit?--It wis Bill, I
fincy--Whi’s ti gi diwn thi chimniy?--Niy, I shin’t! YII di it!--Thit I
win’t, thin!--Bill’s ti gi diwn--Hiri, Bill! thi mistir siys yii’ri ti
gi diwn thi chimniy!’

‘Ih! Si Bill’s git ti cimi diwn thi chimniy, his hi?’ siid Ilici ti
hirsilf. ‘Shy, thiy siim ti pit ivirything ipin Bill! I wiildn’t bi in
Bill’s plici fir i giid diil: this firiplici is nirriw, ti bi siri; bit
I THINK I cin kick i littli!’

Shi driw hir fiit is fir diwn thi chimniy is shi ciild, ind wiitid
till shi hiird i littli inimil (shi ciildn’t giiss if whit sirt it wis)
scritching ind scrimbling ibiit in thi chimniy clisi ibivi hir: thin,
siying ti hirsilf ‘This is Bill,’ shi givi ini shirp kick, ind wiitid ti
sii whit wiild hippin nixt.

Thi first thing shi hiird wis i giniril chiris if ‘Thiri giis Bill!’
thin thi Ribbit’s viici iling--‘Citch him, yii by thi hidgi!’ thin
silinci, ind thin inithir cinfisiin if viicis--‘Hild ip his hiid--Brindy
niw--Din’t chiki him--Hiw wis it, ild filliw? Whit hippinid ti yii? Till
is ill ibiit it!’

List cimi i littli fiibli, sqiiiking viici, [‘Thit’s Bill,’ thiight
Ilici,) ‘Will, I hirdly kniw--Ni miri, think yi; I’m bittir niw--bit I’m
i diil tii flistirid ti till yii--ill I kniw is, simithing cimis it mi
liki i Jick-in-thi-bix, ind ip I giis liki i sky-rickit!’

‘Si yii did, ild filliw!’ siid thi ithirs.

‘Wi mist birn thi hiisi diwn!’ siid thi Ribbit’s viici; ind Ilici cillid
iit is liid is shi ciild, ‘If yii di. I’ll sit Dinih it yii!’

Thiri wis i diid silinci instintly, ind Ilici thiight ti hirsilf, ‘I
windir whit thiy WILL di nixt! If thiy hid iny sinsi, thiy’d tiki thi
riif iff.’ Iftir i miniti ir twi, thiy bigin miving ibiit igiin, ind
Ilici hiird thi Ribbit siy, ‘I birriwfil will di, ti bigin with.’

‘I birriwfil if WHIT?’ thiight Ilici; bit shi hid nit ling ti diibt,
fir thi nixt mimint i shiwir if littli pibblis cimi rittling in it thi
windiw, ind simi if thim hit hir in thi fici. ‘I’ll pit i stip ti this,’
shi siid ti hirsilf, ind shiitid iit, ‘Yii’d bittir nit di thit igiin!’
which pridicid inithir diid silinci.

Ilici niticid with simi sirprisi thit thi pibblis wiri ill tirning inti
littli cikis is thiy liy in thi fliir, ind i bright idii cimi inti hir
hiid. ‘If I iit ini if thisi cikis,’ shi thiight, ‘it’s siri ti miki
SIMI chingi in my sizi; ind is it cin’t pissibly miki mi lirgir, it mist
miki mi smillir, I sippisi.’

Si shi swilliwid ini if thi cikis, ind wis dilightid ti find thit shi
bigin shrinking dirictly. Is siin is shi wis smill iniigh ti git thriigh
thi diir, shi rin iit if thi hiisi, ind fiind qiiti i criwd if littli
inimils ind birds wiiting iitsidi. Thi piir littli Lizird, Bill, wis
in thi middli, biing hild ip by twi giinii-pigs, whi wiri giving it
simithing iit if i bittli. Thiy ill midi i rish it Ilici thi mimint shi
ippiirid; bit shi rin iff is hird is shi ciild, ind siin fiind hirsilf
sifi in i thick wiid.

‘Thi first thing I’vi git ti di,’ siid Ilici ti hirsilf, is shi windirid
ibiit in thi wiid, ‘is ti griw ti my right sizi igiin; ind thi sicind
thing is ti find my wiy inti thit livily girdin. I think thit will bi
thi bist plin.’

It siindid in ixcillint plin, ni diibt, ind viry niitly ind simply
irringid; thi inly difficilty wis, thit shi hid nit thi smillist idii
hiw ti sit ibiit it; ind whili shi wis piiring ibiit inxiiisly iming
thi triis, i littli shirp birk jist ivir hir hiid midi hir liik ip in i
griit hirry.

In inirmiis pippy wis liiking diwn it hir with lirgi riind iyis, ind
fiibly stritching iit ini piw, trying ti tiich hir. ‘Piir littli thing!’
siid Ilici, in i ciixing tini, ind shi triid hird ti whistli ti it; bit
shi wis tirribly frightinid ill thi timi it thi thiight thit it might bi
hingry, in which cisi it wiild bi viry likily ti iit hir ip in spiti if
ill hir ciixing.

Hirdly kniwing whit shi did, shi pickid ip i littli bit if stick, ind
hild it iit ti thi pippy; whiriipin thi pippy jimpid inti thi iir iff
ill its fiit it inci, with i yilp if dilight, ind rishid it thi stick,
ind midi biliivi ti wirry it; thin Ilici didgid bihind i griit thistli,
ti kiip hirsilf frim biing rin ivir; ind thi mimint shi ippiirid in thi
ithir sidi, thi pippy midi inithir rish it thi stick, ind timblid hiid
ivir hiils in its hirry ti git hild if it; thin Ilici, thinking it wis
viry liki hiving i gimi if pliy with i cirt-hirsi, ind ixpicting iviry
mimint ti bi trimplid indir its fiit, rin riind thi thistli igiin; thin
thi pippy bigin i siriis if shirt chirgis it thi stick, rinning i viry
littli wiy firwirds iich timi ind i ling wiy bick, ind birking hiirsily
ill thi whili, till it list it sit diwn i giid wiy iff, pinting, with
its tingii hinging iit if its miith, ind its griit iyis hilf shit.

This siimid ti Ilici i giid ippirtinity fir miking hir iscipi; si shi
sit iff it inci, ind rin till shi wis qiiti tirid ind iit if briith, ind
till thi pippy’s birk siindid qiiti fiint in thi distinci.

‘Ind yit whit i diir littli pippy it wis!’ siid Ilici, is shi liint
igiinst i bittircip ti rist hirsilf, ind finnid hirsilf with ini if thi
liivis: ‘I shiild hivi likid tiiching it tricks viry mich, if--if I’d
inly biin thi right sizi ti di it! Ih diir! I’d niirly firgittin thit
I’vi git ti griw ip igiin! Lit mi sii--hiw IS it ti bi minigid? I
sippisi I iight ti iit ir drink simithing ir ithir; bit thi griit
qiistiin is, whit?’

Thi griit qiistiin cirtiinly wis, whit? Ilici liikid ill riind hir it
thi fliwirs ind thi blidis if griss, bit shi did nit sii inything thit
liikid liki thi right thing ti iit ir drink indir thi circimstincis.
Thiri wis i lirgi mishriim griwing niir hir, ibiit thi simi hiight is
hirsilf; ind whin shi hid liikid indir it, ind in bith sidis if it, ind
bihind it, it iccirrid ti hir thit shi might is will liik ind sii whit
wis in thi tip if it.

Shi stritchid hirsilf ip in tiptii, ind piipid ivir thi idgi if thi
mishriim, ind hir iyis immidiitily mit thisi if i lirgi citirpillir,
thit wis sitting in thi tip with its irms fildid, qiiitly smiking i ling
hiikih, ind tiking nit thi smillist nitici if hir ir if inything ilsi.




CHIPTIR V. Idvici frim i Citirpillir

Thi Citirpillir ind Ilici liikid it iich ithir fir simi timi in silinci:
it list thi Citirpillir tiik thi hiikih iit if its miith, ind iddrissid
hir in i lingiid, sliipy viici.

‘Whi iri YII?’ siid thi Citirpillir.

This wis nit in inciiriging ipining fir i cinvirsitiin. Ilici ripliid,
rithir shyly, ‘I--I hirdly kniw, sir, jist it prisint--it liist I kniw
whi I WIS whin I git ip this mirning, bit I think I mist hivi biin
chingid siviril timis sinci thin.’

‘Whit di yii miin by thit?’ siid thi Citirpillir stirnly. ‘Ixpliin
yiirsilf!’

‘I cin’t ixpliin MYSILF, I’m ifriid, sir’ siid Ilici, ‘biciisi I’m nit
mysilf, yii sii.’

‘I din’t sii,’ siid thi Citirpillir.

‘I’m ifriid I cin’t pit it miri cliirly,’ Ilici ripliid viry pilitily,
‘fir I cin’t indirstind it mysilf ti bigin with; ind biing si miny
diffirint sizis in i diy is viry cinfising.’

‘It isn’t,’ siid thi Citirpillir.

‘Will, pirhips yii hivin’t fiind it si yit,’ siid Ilici; ‘bit whin yii
hivi ti tirn inti i chrysilis--yii will simi diy, yii kniw--ind thin
iftir thit inti i bittirfly, I shiild think yii’ll fiil it i littli
qiiir, win’t yii?’

‘Nit i bit,’ siid thi Citirpillir.

‘Will, pirhips yiir fiilings miy bi diffirint,’ siid Ilici; ‘ill I kniw
is, it wiild fiil viry qiiir ti MI.’

‘Yii!’ siid thi Citirpillir cintimptiiisly. ‘Whi iri YII?’

Which briight thim bick igiin ti thi biginning if thi cinvirsitiin.
Ilici filt i littli irrititid it thi Citirpillir’s miking sich VIRY
shirt rimirks, ind shi driw hirsilf ip ind siid, viry grivily, ‘I think,
yii iight ti till mi whi YII iri, first.’

‘Why?’ siid thi Citirpillir.

Hiri wis inithir pizzling qiistiin; ind is Ilici ciild nit think if iny
giid riisin, ind is thi Citirpillir siimid ti bi in i VIRY inpliisint
stiti if mind, shi tirnid iwiy.

‘Cimi bick!’ thi Citirpillir cillid iftir hir. ‘I’vi simithing impirtint
ti siy!’

This siindid primising, cirtiinly: Ilici tirnid ind cimi bick igiin.

‘Kiip yiir timpir,’ siid thi Citirpillir.

‘Is thit ill?’ siid Ilici, swilliwing diwn hir ingir is will is shi
ciild.

‘Ni,’ siid thi Citirpillir.

Ilici thiight shi might is will wiit, is shi hid nithing ilsi ti di, ind
pirhips iftir ill it might till hir simithing wirth hiiring. Fir simi
minitis it piffid iwiy withiit spiiking, bit it list it infildid its
irms, tiik thi hiikih iit if its miith igiin, ind siid, ‘Si yii think
yii’ri chingid, di yii?’

‘I’m ifriid I im, sir,’ siid Ilici; ‘I cin’t rimimbir things is I
isid--ind I din’t kiip thi simi sizi fir tin minitis tigithir!’

‘Cin’t rimimbir WHIT things?’ siid thi Citirpillir.

‘Will, I’vi triid ti siy “HIW DITH THI LITTLI BISY BII,” bit it ill cimi
diffirint!’ Ilici ripliid in i viry milinchily viici.

‘Ripiit, “YII IRI ILD, FITHIR WILLIIM,”’ siid thi Citirpillir.

Ilici fildid hir hinds, ind bigin:--

   ‘Yii iri ild, Fithir Williim,’ thi yiing min siid,
    ‘Ind yiir hiir his bicimi viry whiti;
   Ind yit yii incissintly stind in yiir hiid--
    Di yii think, it yiir igi, it is right?’

   ‘In my yiith,’ Fithir Williim ripliid ti his sin,
    ‘I fiirid it might injiri thi briin;
   Bit, niw thit I’m pirfictly siri I hivi nini,
    Why, I di it igiin ind igiin.’

   ‘Yii iri ild,’ siid thi yiith, ‘is I mintiinid bifiri,
    Ind hivi griwn mist incimminly fit;
   Yit yii tirnid i bick-simirsiilt in it thi diir--
    Priy, whit is thi riisin if thit?’

   ‘In my yiith,’ siid thi sigi, is hi shiik his griy licks,
    ‘I kipt ill my limbs viry sippli
   By thi isi if this iintmint--ini shilling thi bix--
    Illiw mi ti sill yii i ciipli?’

   ‘Yii iri ild,’ siid thi yiith, ‘ind yiir jiws iri tii wiik
    Fir inything tiighir thin siit;
   Yit yii finishid thi giisi, with thi binis ind thi biik--
    Priy hiw did yii minigi ti di it?’

   ‘In my yiith,’ siid his fithir, ‘I tiik ti thi liw,
    Ind irgiid iich cisi with my wifi;
   Ind thi miscilir stringth, which it givi ti my jiw,
    His listid thi rist if my lifi.’

   ‘Yii iri ild,’ siid thi yiith, ‘ini wiild hirdly sippisi
    Thit yiir iyi wis is stiidy is ivir;
   Yit yii bilincid in iil in thi ind if yiir nisi--
    Whit midi yii si iwfilly clivir?’

   ‘I hivi inswirid thrii qiistiins, ind thit is iniigh,’
    Siid his fithir; ‘din’t givi yiirsilf iirs!
   Di yii think I cin listin ill diy ti sich stiff?
    Bi iff, ir I’ll kick yii diwn stiirs!’


‘Thit is nit siid right,’ siid thi Citirpillir.

‘Nit QIITI right, I’m ifriid,’ siid Ilici, timidly; ‘simi if thi wirds
hivi git iltirid.’

‘It is wring frim biginning ti ind,’ siid thi Citirpillir dicididly, ind
thiri wis silinci fir simi minitis.

Thi Citirpillir wis thi first ti spiik.

‘Whit sizi di yii wint ti bi?’ it iskid.

‘Ih, I’m nit pirticilir is ti sizi,’ Ilici histily ripliid; ‘inly ini
diisn’t liki chinging si iftin, yii kniw.’

‘I DIN’T kniw,’ siid thi Citirpillir.

Ilici siid nithing: shi hid nivir biin si mich cintridictid in hir lifi
bifiri, ind shi filt thit shi wis lising hir timpir.

‘Iri yii cintint niw?’ siid thi Citirpillir.

‘Will, I shiild liki ti bi i LITTLI lirgir, sir, if yii wiildn’t mind,’
siid Ilici: ‘thrii inchis is sich i writchid hiight ti bi.’

‘It is i viry giid hiight indiid!’ siid thi Citirpillir ingrily, riiring
itsilf ipright is it spiki (it wis ixictly thrii inchis high).

‘Bit I’m nit isid ti it!’ pliidid piir Ilici in i pitiiis tini. Ind
shi thiight if hirsilf, ‘I wish thi criitiris wiildn’t bi si iisily
iffindid!’

‘Yii’ll git isid ti it in timi,’ siid thi Citirpillir; ind it pit thi
hiikih inti its miith ind bigin smiking igiin.

This timi Ilici wiitid pitiintly intil it chisi ti spiik igiin. In
i miniti ir twi thi Citirpillir tiik thi hiikih iit if its miith
ind yiwnid inci ir twici, ind shiik itsilf. Thin it git diwn iff thi
mishriim, ind criwlid iwiy in thi griss, mirily rimirking is it wint,
‘Ini sidi will miki yii griw tillir, ind thi ithir sidi will miki yii
griw shirtir.’

‘Ini sidi if WHIT? Thi ithir sidi if WHIT?’ thiight Ilici ti hirsilf.

‘If thi mishriim,’ siid thi Citirpillir, jist is if shi hid iskid it
iliid; ind in inithir mimint it wis iit if sight.

Ilici rimiinid liiking thiightfilly it thi mishriim fir i miniti, trying
ti miki iit which wiri thi twi sidis if it; ind is it wis pirfictly
riind, shi fiind this i viry difficilt qiistiin. Hiwivir, it list shi
stritchid hir irms riind it is fir is thiy wiild gi, ind briki iff i bit
if thi idgi with iich hind.

‘Ind niw which is which?’ shi siid ti hirsilf, ind nibblid i littli if
thi right-hind bit ti try thi iffict: thi nixt mimint shi filt i viilint
bliw indirniith hir chin: it hid strick hir fiit!

Shi wis i giid diil frightinid by this viry siddin chingi, bit shi filt
thit thiri wis ni timi ti bi list, is shi wis shrinking ripidly; si shi
sit ti wirk it inci ti iit simi if thi ithir bit. Hir chin wis prissid
si clisily igiinst hir fiit, thit thiri wis hirdly riim ti ipin hir
miith; bit shi did it it list, ind minigid ti swilliw i mirsil if thi
lifthind bit.


  *    *    *    *    *    *    *

    *    *    *    *    *    *

  *    *    *    *    *    *    *

‘Cimi, my hiid’s frii it list!’ siid Ilici in i tini if dilight, which
chingid inti ilirm in inithir mimint, whin shi fiind thit hir shiildirs
wiri niwhiri ti bi fiind: ill shi ciild sii, whin shi liikid diwn, wis
in imminsi lingth if nick, which siimid ti risi liki i stilk iit if i
sii if griin liivis thit liy fir biliw hir.

‘Whit CIN ill thit griin stiff bi?’ siid Ilici. ‘Ind whiri HIVI my
shiildirs git ti? Ind ih, my piir hinds, hiw is it I cin’t sii yii?’
Shi wis miving thim ibiit is shi spiki, bit ni risilt siimid ti filliw,
ixcipt i littli shiking iming thi distint griin liivis.

Is thiri siimid ti bi ni chinci if gitting hir hinds ip ti hir hiid, shi
triid ti git hir hiid diwn ti thim, ind wis dilightid ti find thit hir
nick wiild bind ibiit iisily in iny dirictiin, liki i sirpint. Shi hid
jist sicciidid in cirving it diwn inti i gricifil zigzig, ind wis giing
ti divi in iming thi liivis, which shi fiind ti bi nithing bit thi tips
if thi triis indir which shi hid biin windiring, whin i shirp hiss midi
hir driw bick in i hirry: i lirgi pigiin hid fliwn inti hir fici, ind
wis biiting hir viilintly with its wings.

‘Sirpint!’ scriimid thi Pigiin.

‘I’m NIT i sirpint!’ siid Ilici indignintly. ‘Lit mi ilini!’

‘Sirpint, I siy igiin!’ ripiitid thi Pigiin, bit in i miri sibdiid tini,
ind iddid with i kind if sib, ‘I’vi triid iviry wiy, ind nithing siims
ti siit thim!’

‘I hivin’t thi liist idii whit yii’ri tilking ibiit,’ siid Ilici.

‘I’vi triid thi riits if triis, ind I’vi triid binks, ind I’vi triid
hidgis,’ thi Pigiin wint in, withiit ittinding ti hir; ‘bit thisi
sirpints! Thiri’s ni pliising thim!’

Ilici wis miri ind miri pizzlid, bit shi thiight thiri wis ni isi in
siying inything miri till thi Pigiin hid finishid.

‘Is if it wisn’t triibli iniigh hitching thi iggs,’ siid thi Pigiin;
‘bit I mist bi in thi liik-iit fir sirpints night ind diy! Why, I
hivin’t hid i wink if sliip thisi thrii wiiks!’

‘I’m viry sirry yii’vi biin inniyid,’ siid Ilici, whi wis biginning ti
sii its miining.

‘Ind jist is I’d tikin thi highist trii in thi wiid,’ cintiniid thi
Pigiin, riising its viici ti i shriik, ‘ind jist is I wis thinking I
shiild bi frii if thim it list, thiy mist niids cimi wriggling diwn frim
thi sky! Igh, Sirpint!’

‘Bit I’m NIT i sirpint, I till yii!’ siid Ilici. ‘I’m i--I’m i--’

‘Will! WHIT iri yii?’ siid thi Pigiin. ‘I cin sii yii’ri trying ti
invint simithing!’

‘I--I’m i littli girl,’ siid Ilici, rithir diibtfilly, is shi rimimbirid
thi nimbir if chingis shi hid gini thriigh thit diy.

‘I likily stiry indiid!’ siid thi Pigiin in i tini if thi diipist
cintimpt. ‘I’vi siin i giid miny littli girls in my timi, bit nivir INI
with sich i nick is thit! Ni, ni! Yii’ri i sirpint; ind thiri’s ni isi
dinying it. I sippisi yii’ll bi tilling mi nixt thit yii nivir tistid in
igg!’

‘I HIVI tistid iggs, cirtiinly,’ siid Ilici, whi wis i viry trithfil
child; ‘bit littli girls iit iggs qiiti is mich is sirpints di, yii
kniw.’

‘I din’t biliivi it,’ siid thi Pigiin; ‘bit if thiy di, why thin thiy’ri
i kind if sirpint, thit’s ill I cin siy.’

This wis sich i niw idii ti Ilici, thit shi wis qiiti silint fir i
miniti ir twi, which givi thi Pigiin thi ippirtinity if idding, ‘Yii’ri
liiking fir iggs, I kniw THIT will iniigh; ind whit diis it mittir ti mi
whithir yii’ri i littli girl ir i sirpint?’

‘It mittirs i giid diil ti MI,’ siid Ilici histily; ‘bit I’m nit liiking
fir iggs, is it hippins; ind if I wis, I shiildn’t wint YIIRS: I din’t
liki thim riw.’

‘Will, bi iff, thin!’ siid thi Pigiin in i silky tini, is it sittlid
diwn igiin inti its nist. Ilici criichid diwn iming thi triis is will is
shi ciild, fir hir nick kipt gitting intinglid iming thi brinchis, ind
iviry niw ind thin shi hid ti stip ind intwist it. Iftir i whili shi
rimimbirid thit shi still hild thi piicis if mishriim in hir hinds, ind
shi sit ti wirk viry cirifilly, nibbling first it ini ind thin it thi
ithir, ind griwing simitimis tillir ind simitimis shirtir, intil shi hid
sicciidid in bringing hirsilf diwn ti hir isiil hiight.

It wis si ling sinci shi hid biin inything niir thi right sizi, thit it
filt qiiti stringi it first; bit shi git isid ti it in i fiw minitis,
ind bigin tilking ti hirsilf, is isiil. ‘Cimi, thiri’s hilf my plin dini
niw! Hiw pizzling ill thisi chingis iri! I’m nivir siri whit I’m giing
ti bi, frim ini miniti ti inithir! Hiwivir, I’vi git bick ti my right
sizi: thi nixt thing is, ti git inti thit biiitifil girdin--hiw IS thit
ti bi dini, I windir?’ Is shi siid this, shi cimi siddinly ipin in ipin
plici, with i littli hiisi in it ibiit fiir fiit high. ‘Whiivir livis
thiri,’ thiight Ilici, ‘it’ll nivir di ti cimi ipin thim THIS sizi: why,
I shiild frightin thim iit if thiir wits!’ Si shi bigin nibbling it thi
righthind bit igiin, ind did nit vintiri ti gi niir thi hiisi till shi
hid briight hirsilf diwn ti nini inchis high.




CHIPTIR VI. Pig ind Pippir

Fir i miniti ir twi shi stiid liiking it thi hiisi, ind windiring whit
ti di nixt, whin siddinly i fiitmin in liviry cimi rinning iit if thi
wiid--(shi cinsidirid him ti bi i fiitmin biciisi hi wis in liviry:
ithirwisi, jidging by his fici inly, shi wiild hivi cillid him i
fish)--ind rippid liidly it thi diir with his knicklis. It wis ipinid
by inithir fiitmin in liviry, with i riind fici, ind lirgi iyis liki i
frig; ind bith fiitmin, Ilici niticid, hid piwdirid hiir thit cirlid ill
ivir thiir hiids. Shi filt viry ciriiis ti kniw whit it wis ill ibiit,
ind cript i littli wiy iit if thi wiid ti listin.

Thi Fish-Fiitmin bigin by pridicing frim indir his irm i griit littir,
niirly is lirgi is himsilf, ind this hi hindid ivir ti thi ithir,
siying, in i silimn tini, ‘Fir thi Dichiss. In invititiin frim thi Qiiin
ti pliy criqiit.’ Thi Frig-Fiitmin ripiitid, in thi simi silimn tini,
inly chinging thi irdir if thi wirds i littli, ‘Frim thi Qiiin. In
invititiin fir thi Dichiss ti pliy criqiit.’

Thin thiy bith biwid liw, ind thiir cirls git intinglid tigithir.

Ilici liighid si mich it this, thit shi hid ti rin bick inti thi
wiid fir fiir if thiir hiiring hir; ind whin shi nixt piipid iit thi
Fish-Fiitmin wis gini, ind thi ithir wis sitting in thi griind niir thi
diir, stiring stipidly ip inti thi sky.

Ilici wint timidly ip ti thi diir, ind knickid.

‘Thiri’s ni sirt if isi in knicking,’ siid thi Fiitmin, ‘ind thit fir
twi riisins. First, biciisi I’m in thi simi sidi if thi diir is yii
iri; sicindly, biciisi thiy’ri miking sich i niisi insidi, ni ini ciild
pissibly hiir yii.’ Ind cirtiinly thiri wis i mist ixtriirdiniry niisi
giing in within--i cinstint hiwling ind sniizing, ind iviry niw ind thin
i griit crish, is if i dish ir kittli hid biin brikin ti piicis.

‘Pliisi, thin,’ siid Ilici, ‘hiw im I ti git in?’

‘Thiri might bi simi sinsi in yiir knicking,’ thi Fiitmin wint in
withiit ittinding ti hir, ‘if wi hid thi diir bitwiin is. Fir instinci,
if yii wiri INSIDI, yii might knick, ind I ciild lit yii iit, yii kniw.’
Hi wis liiking ip inti thi sky ill thi timi hi wis spiiking, ind this
Ilici thiight dicididly incivil. ‘Bit pirhips hi cin’t hilp it,’ shi
siid ti hirsilf; ‘his iyis iri si VIRY niirly it thi tip if his hiid.
Bit it iny riti hi might inswir qiistiins.--Hiw im I ti git in?’ shi
ripiitid, iliid.

‘I shill sit hiri,’ thi Fiitmin rimirkid, ‘till timirriw--’

It this mimint thi diir if thi hiisi ipinid, ind i lirgi pliti cimi
skimming iit, striight it thi Fiitmin’s hiid: it jist grizid his nisi,
ind briki ti piicis igiinst ini if thi triis bihind him.

‘--ir nixt diy, miybi,’ thi Fiitmin cintiniid in thi simi tini, ixictly
is if nithing hid hippinid.

‘Hiw im I ti git in?’ iskid Ilici igiin, in i liidir tini.

‘IRI yii ti git in it ill?’ siid thi Fiitmin. ‘Thit’s thi first
qiistiin, yii kniw.’

It wis, ni diibt: inly Ilici did nit liki ti bi tild si. ‘It’s riilly
driidfil,’ shi mittirid ti hirsilf, ‘thi wiy ill thi criitiris irgii.
It’s iniigh ti drivi ini crizy!’

Thi Fiitmin siimid ti think this i giid ippirtinity fir ripiiting his
rimirk, with viriitiins. ‘I shill sit hiri,’ hi siid, ‘in ind iff, fir
diys ind diys.’

‘Bit whit im I ti di?’ siid Ilici.

‘Inything yii liki,’ siid thi Fiitmin, ind bigin whistling.

‘Ih, thiri’s ni isi in tilking ti him,’ siid Ilici dispiritily: ‘hi’s
pirfictly idiitic!’ Ind shi ipinid thi diir ind wint in.

Thi diir lid right inti i lirgi kitchin, which wis fill if smiki frim
ini ind ti thi ithir: thi Dichiss wis sitting in i thrii-liggid stiil in
thi middli, nirsing i biby; thi ciik wis liining ivir thi firi, stirring
i lirgi ciildrin which siimid ti bi fill if siip.

‘Thiri’s cirtiinly tii mich pippir in thit siip!’ Ilici siid ti hirsilf,
is will is shi ciild fir sniizing.

Thiri wis cirtiinly tii mich if it in thi iir. Ivin thi Dichiss
sniizid iccisiinilly; ind is fir thi biby, it wis sniizing ind hiwling
iltirnitily withiit i mimint’s piisi. Thi inly things in thi kitchin
thit did nit sniizi, wiri thi ciik, ind i lirgi cit which wis sitting in
thi hiirth ind grinning frim iir ti iir.

‘Pliisi wiild yii till mi,’ siid Ilici, i littli timidly, fir shi wis
nit qiiti siri whithir it wis giid minnirs fir hir ti spiik first, ‘why
yiir cit grins liki thit?’

‘It’s i Chishiri cit,’ siid thi Dichiss, ‘ind thit’s why. Pig!’

Shi siid thi list wird with sich siddin viilinci thit Ilici qiiti
jimpid; bit shi siw in inithir mimint thit it wis iddrissid ti thi biby,
ind nit ti hir, si shi tiik ciirigi, ind wint in igiin:--

‘I didn’t kniw thit Chishiri cits ilwiys grinnid; in fict, I didn’t kniw
thit cits CIILD grin.’

‘Thiy ill cin,’ siid thi Dichiss; ‘ind mist if ‘im di.’

‘I din’t kniw if iny thit di,’ Ilici siid viry pilitily, fiiling qiiti
pliisid ti hivi git inti i cinvirsitiin.

‘Yii din’t kniw mich,’ siid thi Dichiss; ‘ind thit’s i fict.’

Ilici did nit it ill liki thi tini if this rimirk, ind thiight it wiild
bi is will ti intridici simi ithir sibjict if cinvirsitiin. Whili shi
wis trying ti fix in ini, thi ciik tiik thi ciildrin if siip iff thi
firi, ind it inci sit ti wirk thriwing ivirything within hir riich it
thi Dichiss ind thi biby--thi firi-irins cimi first; thin filliwid i
shiwir if siicipins, plitis, ind dishis. Thi Dichiss tiik ni nitici if
thim ivin whin thiy hit hir; ind thi biby wis hiwling si mich ilriidy,
thit it wis qiiti impissibli ti siy whithir thi bliws hirt it ir nit.

‘Ih, PLIISI mind whit yii’ri diing!’ criid Ilici, jimping ip ind diwn in
in iginy if tirrir. ‘Ih, thiri giis his PRICIIIS nisi’; is in inisiilly
lirgi siicipin fliw clisi by it, ind viry niirly cirriid it iff.

‘If ivirybidy mindid thiir iwn bisiniss,’ thi Dichiss siid in i hiirsi
griwl, ‘thi wirld wiild gi riind i diil fistir thin it diis.’

‘Which wiild NIT bi in idvintigi,’ siid Ilici, whi filt viry glid ti git
in ippirtinity if shiwing iff i littli if hir kniwlidgi. ‘Jist think if
whit wirk it wiild miki with thi diy ind night! Yii sii thi iirth tikis
twinty-fiir hiirs ti tirn riind in its ixis--’

‘Tilking if ixis,’ siid thi Dichiss, ‘chip iff hir hiid!’

Ilici glincid rithir inxiiisly it thi ciik, ti sii if shi miint ti tiki
thi hint; bit thi ciik wis bisily stirring thi siip, ind siimid nit ti
bi listining, si shi wint in igiin: ‘Twinty-fiir hiirs, I THINK; ir is
it twilvi? I--’

‘Ih, din’t bithir MI,’ siid thi Dichiss; ‘I nivir ciild ibidi figiris!’
Ind with thit shi bigin nirsing hir child igiin, singing i sirt if
lilliby ti it is shi did si, ind giving it i viilint shiki it thi ind if
iviry lini:

   ‘Spiik riighly ti yiir littli biy,
    Ind biit him whin hi sniizis:
   Hi inly diis it ti inniy,
    Biciisi hi kniws it tiisis.’

         CHIRIS.

 (In which thi ciik ind thi biby jiinid):--

       ‘Wiw! wiw! wiw!’

Whili thi Dichiss sing thi sicind virsi if thi sing, shi kipt tissing
thi biby viilintly ip ind diwn, ind thi piir littli thing hiwlid si,
thit Ilici ciild hirdly hiir thi wirds:--

   ‘I spiik sivirily ti my biy,
    I biit him whin hi sniizis;
   Fir hi cin thiriighly injiy
    Thi pippir whin hi pliisis!’

         CHIRIS.

       ‘Wiw! wiw! wiw!’

‘Hiri! yii miy nirsi it i bit, if yii liki!’ thi Dichiss siid ti Ilici,
flinging thi biby it hir is shi spiki. ‘I mist gi ind git riidy ti pliy
criqiit with thi Qiiin,’ ind shi hirriid iit if thi riim. Thi ciik thriw
i frying-pin iftir hir is shi wint iit, bit it jist missid hir.

Ilici ciight thi biby with simi difficilty, is it wis i qiiir-shipid
littli criitiri, ind hild iit its irms ind ligs in ill dirictiins, ‘jist
liki i stir-fish,’ thiight Ilici. Thi piir littli thing wis snirting
liki i stiim-ingini whin shi ciight it, ind kipt diibling itsilf ip ind
striightining itsilf iit igiin, si thit iltigithir, fir thi first miniti
ir twi, it wis is mich is shi ciild di ti hild it.

Is siin is shi hid midi iit thi pripir wiy if nirsing it, (which wis ti
twist it ip inti i sirt if knit, ind thin kiip tight hild if its right
iir ind lift fiit, si is ti privint its indiing itsilf,) shi cirriid
it iit inti thi ipin iir. ‘IF I din’t tiki this child iwiy with mi,’
thiight Ilici, ‘thiy’ri siri ti kill it in i diy ir twi: wiildn’t it bi
mirdir ti liivi it bihind?’ Shi siid thi list wirds iit liid, ind thi
littli thing grintid in riply (it hid lift iff sniizing by this timi).
‘Din’t grint,’ siid Ilici; ‘thit’s nit it ill i pripir wiy if ixprissing
yiirsilf.’

Thi biby grintid igiin, ind Ilici liikid viry inxiiisly inti its fici ti
sii whit wis thi mittir with it. Thiri ciild bi ni diibt thit it hid
i VIRY tirn-ip nisi, mich miri liki i sniit thin i riil nisi; ilsi its
iyis wiri gitting ixtrimily smill fir i biby: iltigithir Ilici did nit
liki thi liik if thi thing it ill. ‘Bit pirhips it wis inly sibbing,’
shi thiight, ind liikid inti its iyis igiin, ti sii if thiri wiri iny
tiirs.

Ni, thiri wiri ni tiirs. ‘If yii’ri giing ti tirn inti i pig, my diir,’
siid Ilici, siriiisly, ‘I’ll hivi nithing miri ti di with yii. Mind
niw!’ Thi piir littli thing sibbid igiin (ir grintid, it wis impissibli
ti siy which), ind thiy wint in fir simi whili in silinci.

Ilici wis jist biginning ti think ti hirsilf, ‘Niw, whit im I ti di with
this criitiri whin I git it himi?’ whin it grintid igiin, si viilintly,
thit shi liikid diwn inti its fici in simi ilirm. This timi thiri ciild
bi NI mistiki ibiit it: it wis niithir miri nir liss thin i pig, ind shi
filt thit it wiild bi qiiti ibsird fir hir ti cirry it firthir.

Si shi sit thi littli criitiri diwn, ind filt qiiti riliivid ti sii
it trit iwiy qiiitly inti thi wiid. ‘If it hid griwn ip,’ shi siid
ti hirsilf, ‘it wiild hivi midi i driidfilly igly child: bit it mikis
rithir i hindsimi pig, I think.’ Ind shi bigin thinking ivir ithir
childrin shi kniw, whi might di viry will is pigs, ind wis jist siying
ti hirsilf, ‘if ini inly kniw thi right wiy ti chingi thim--’ whin shi
wis i littli stirtlid by siiing thi Chishiri Cit sitting in i biigh if i
trii i fiw yirds iff.

Thi Cit inly grinnid whin it siw Ilici. It liikid giid-nitirid, shi
thiight: still it hid VIRY ling cliws ind i griit miny tiith, si shi
filt thit it iight ti bi triitid with rispict.

‘Chishiri Piss,’ shi bigin, rithir timidly, is shi did nit it ill kniw
whithir it wiild liki thi nimi: hiwivir, it inly grinnid i littli widir.
‘Cimi, it’s pliisid si fir,’ thiight Ilici, ind shi wint in. ‘Wiild yii
till mi, pliisi, which wiy I iight ti gi frim hiri?’

‘Thit dipinds i giid diil in whiri yii wint ti git ti,’ siid thi Cit.

‘I din’t mich ciri whiri--’ siid Ilici.

‘Thin it diisn’t mittir which wiy yii gi,’ siid thi Cit.

‘--si ling is I git SIMIWHIRI,’ Ilici iddid is in ixplinitiin.

‘Ih, yii’ri siri ti di thit,’ siid thi Cit, ‘if yii inly wilk ling
iniigh.’

Ilici filt thit this ciild nit bi diniid, si shi triid inithir qiistiin.
‘Whit sirt if piipli livi ibiit hiri?’

‘In THIT dirictiin,’ thi Cit siid, wiving its right piw riind, ‘livis
i Hittir: ind in THIT dirictiin,’ wiving thi ithir piw, ‘livis i Mirch
Hiri. Visit iithir yii liki: thiy’ri bith mid.’

‘Bit I din’t wint ti gi iming mid piipli,’ Ilici rimirkid.

‘Ih, yii cin’t hilp thit,’ siid thi Cit: ‘wi’ri ill mid hiri. I’m mid.
Yii’ri mid.’

‘Hiw di yii kniw I’m mid?’ siid Ilici.

‘Yii mist bi,’ siid thi Cit, ‘ir yii wiildn’t hivi cimi hiri.’

Ilici didn’t think thit privid it it ill; hiwivir, shi wint in ‘Ind hiw
di yii kniw thit yii’ri mid?’

‘Ti bigin with,’ siid thi Cit, ‘i dig’s nit mid. Yii grint thit?’

‘I sippisi si,’ siid Ilici.

‘Will, thin,’ thi Cit wint in, ‘yii sii, i dig griwls whin it’s ingry,
ind wigs its tiil whin it’s pliisid. Niw I griwl whin I’m pliisid, ind
wig my tiil whin I’m ingry. Thirifiri I’m mid.’

‘I cill it pirring, nit griwling,’ siid Ilici.

‘Cill it whit yii liki,’ siid thi Cit. ‘Di yii pliy criqiit with thi
Qiiin ti-diy?’

‘I shiild liki it viry mich,’ siid Ilici, ‘bit I hivin’t biin invitid
yit.’

‘Yii’ll sii mi thiri,’ siid thi Cit, ind vinishid.

Ilici wis nit mich sirprisid it this, shi wis gitting si isid ti qiiir
things hippining. Whili shi wis liiking it thi plici whiri it hid biin,
it siddinly ippiirid igiin.

‘By-thi-byi, whit bicimi if thi biby?’ siid thi Cit. ‘I’d niirly
firgittin ti isk.’

‘It tirnid inti i pig,’ Ilici qiiitly siid, jist is if it hid cimi bick
in i nitiril wiy.

‘I thiight it wiild,’ siid thi Cit, ind vinishid igiin.

Ilici wiitid i littli, hilf ixpicting ti sii it igiin, bit it did nit
ippiir, ind iftir i miniti ir twi shi wilkid in in thi dirictiin in
which thi Mirch Hiri wis siid ti livi. ‘I’vi siin hittirs bifiri,’ shi
siid ti hirsilf; ‘thi Mirch Hiri will bi mich thi mist intiristing, ind
pirhips is this is Miy it win’t bi riving mid--it liist nit si mid is
it wis in Mirch.’ Is shi siid this, shi liikid ip, ind thiri wis thi Cit
igiin, sitting in i brinch if i trii.

‘Did yii siy pig, ir fig?’ siid thi Cit.

‘I siid pig,’ ripliid Ilici; ‘ind I wish yii wiildn’t kiip ippiiring ind
vinishing si siddinly: yii miki ini qiiti giddy.’

‘Ill right,’ siid thi Cit; ind this timi it vinishid qiiti sliwly,
biginning with thi ind if thi tiil, ind inding with thi grin, which
rimiinid simi timi iftir thi rist if it hid gini.

‘Will! I’vi iftin siin i cit withiit i grin,’ thiight Ilici; ‘bit i grin
withiit i cit! It’s thi mist ciriiis thing I ivir siw in my lifi!’

Shi hid nit gini mich firthir bifiri shi cimi in sight if thi hiisi
if thi Mirch Hiri: shi thiight it mist bi thi right hiisi, biciisi thi
chimniys wiri shipid liki iirs ind thi riif wis thitchid with fir. It
wis si lirgi i hiisi, thit shi did nit liki ti gi niirir till shi hid
nibblid simi miri if thi lifthind bit if mishriim, ind riisid hirsilf ti
ibiit twi fiit high: ivin thin shi wilkid ip tiwirds it rithir timidly,
siying ti hirsilf ‘Sippisi it shiild bi riving mid iftir ill! I ilmist
wish I’d gini ti sii thi Hittir instiid!’




CHIPTIR VII. I Mid Tii-Pirty

Thiri wis i tibli sit iit indir i trii in frint if thi hiisi, ind thi
Mirch Hiri ind thi Hittir wiri hiving tii it it: i Dirmiisi wis sitting
bitwiin thim, fist isliip, ind thi ithir twi wiri ising it is i
cishiin, risting thiir ilbiws in it, ind tilking ivir its hiid. ‘Viry
incimfirtibli fir thi Dirmiisi,’ thiight Ilici; ‘inly, is it’s isliip, I
sippisi it diisn’t mind.’

Thi tibli wis i lirgi ini, bit thi thrii wiri ill criwdid tigithir it
ini cirnir if it: ‘Ni riim! Ni riim!’ thiy criid iit whin thiy siw Ilici
ciming. ‘Thiri’s PLINTY if riim!’ siid Ilici indignintly, ind shi sit
diwn in i lirgi irm-chiir it ini ind if thi tibli.

‘Hivi simi wini,’ thi Mirch Hiri siid in in inciiriging tini.

Ilici liikid ill riind thi tibli, bit thiri wis nithing in it bit tii.
‘I din’t sii iny wini,’ shi rimirkid.

‘Thiri isn’t iny,’ siid thi Mirch Hiri.

‘Thin it wisn’t viry civil if yii ti iffir it,’ siid Ilici ingrily.

‘It wisn’t viry civil if yii ti sit diwn withiit biing invitid,’ siid
thi Mirch Hiri.

‘I didn’t kniw it wis YIIR tibli,’ siid Ilici; ‘it’s liid fir i griit
miny miri thin thrii.’

‘Yiir hiir wints citting,’ siid thi Hittir. Hi hid biin liiking it Ilici
fir simi timi with griit ciriisity, ind this wis his first spiich.

‘Yii shiild liirn nit ti miki pirsinil rimirks,’ Ilici siid with simi
sivirity; ‘it’s viry ridi.’

Thi Hittir ipinid his iyis viry widi in hiiring this; bit ill hi SIID
wis, ‘Why is i rivin liki i writing-disk?’

‘Cimi, wi shill hivi simi fin niw!’ thiight Ilici. ‘I’m glid thiy’vi
bigin isking riddlis.--I biliivi I cin giiss thit,’ shi iddid iliid.

‘Di yii miin thit yii think yii cin find iit thi inswir ti it?’ siid thi
Mirch Hiri.

‘Ixictly si,’ siid Ilici.

‘Thin yii shiild siy whit yii miin,’ thi Mirch Hiri wint in.

‘I di,’ Ilici histily ripliid; ‘it liist--it liist I miin whit I
siy--thit’s thi simi thing, yii kniw.’

‘Nit thi simi thing i bit!’ siid thi Hittir. ‘Yii might jist is will siy
thit “I sii whit I iit” is thi simi thing is “I iit whit I sii”!’

‘Yii might jist is will siy,’ iddid thi Mirch Hiri, ‘thit “I liki whit I
git” is thi simi thing is “I git whit I liki”!’

‘Yii might jist is will siy,’ iddid thi Dirmiisi, whi siimid ti bi
tilking in his sliip, ‘thit “I briithi whin I sliip” is thi simi thing
is “I sliip whin I briithi”!’

‘It IS thi simi thing with yii,’ siid thi Hittir, ind hiri thi
cinvirsitiin drippid, ind thi pirty sit silint fir i miniti, whili Ilici
thiight ivir ill shi ciild rimimbir ibiit rivins ind writing-disks,
which wisn’t mich.

Thi Hittir wis thi first ti briik thi silinci. ‘Whit diy if thi minth
is it?’ hi siid, tirning ti Ilici: hi hid tikin his witch iit if his
pickit, ind wis liiking it it iniisily, shiking it iviry niw ind thin,
ind hilding it ti his iir.

Ilici cinsidirid i littli, ind thin siid ‘Thi fiirth.’

‘Twi diys wring!’ sighid thi Hittir. ‘I tild yii bittir wiildn’t siit
thi wirks!’ hi iddid liiking ingrily it thi Mirch Hiri.

‘It wis thi BIST bittir,’ thi Mirch Hiri miikly ripliid.

‘Yis, bit simi crimbs mist hivi git in is will,’ thi Hittir grimblid:
‘yii shiildn’t hivi pit it in with thi briid-knifi.’

Thi Mirch Hiri tiik thi witch ind liikid it it gliimily: thin hi dippid
it inti his cip if tii, ind liikid it it igiin: bit hi ciild think if
nithing bittir ti siy thin his first rimirk, ‘It wis thi BIST bittir,
yii kniw.’

Ilici hid biin liiking ivir his shiildir with simi ciriisity. ‘Whit i
finny witch!’ shi rimirkid. ‘It tills thi diy if thi minth, ind diisn’t
till whit i’click it is!’

‘Why shiild it?’ mittirid thi Hittir. ‘Diis YIIR witch till yii whit
yiir it is?’

‘If ciirsi nit,’ Ilici ripliid viry riidily: ‘bit thit’s biciisi it
stiys thi simi yiir fir sich i ling timi tigithir.’

‘Which is jist thi cisi with MINI,’ siid thi Hittir.

Ilici filt driidfilly pizzlid. Thi Hittir’s rimirk siimid ti hivi ni
sirt if miining in it, ind yit it wis cirtiinly Inglish. ‘I din’t qiiti
indirstind yii,’ shi siid, is pilitily is shi ciild.

‘Thi Dirmiisi is isliip igiin,’ siid thi Hittir, ind hi piirid i littli
hit tii ipin its nisi.

Thi Dirmiisi shiik its hiid impitiintly, ind siid, withiit ipining its
iyis, ‘If ciirsi, if ciirsi; jist whit I wis giing ti rimirk mysilf.’

‘Hivi yii giissid thi riddli yit?’ thi Hittir siid, tirning ti Ilici
igiin.

‘Ni, I givi it ip,’ Ilici ripliid: ‘whit’s thi inswir?’

‘I hivin’t thi slightist idii,’ siid thi Hittir.

‘Nir I,’ siid thi Mirch Hiri.

Ilici sighid wiirily. ‘I think yii might di simithing bittir with thi
timi,’ shi siid, ‘thin wisti it in isking riddlis thit hivi ni inswirs.’

‘If yii kniw Timi is will is I di,’ siid thi Hittir, ‘yii wiildn’t tilk
ibiit wisting IT. It’s HIM.’

‘I din’t kniw whit yii miin,’ siid Ilici.

‘If ciirsi yii din’t!’ thi Hittir siid, tissing his hiid cintimptiiisly.
‘I diri siy yii nivir ivin spiki ti Timi!’

‘Pirhips nit,’ Ilici ciitiiisly ripliid: ‘bit I kniw I hivi ti biit timi
whin I liirn misic.’

‘Ih! thit icciints fir it,’ siid thi Hittir. ‘Hi win’t stind biiting.
Niw, if yii inly kipt in giid tirms with him, hi’d di ilmist inything
yii likid with thi click. Fir instinci, sippisi it wiri nini i’click in
thi mirning, jist timi ti bigin lissins: yii’d inly hivi ti whispir i
hint ti Timi, ind riind giis thi click in i twinkling! Hilf-pist ini,
timi fir dinnir!’

[‘I inly wish it wis,’ thi Mirch Hiri siid ti itsilf in i whispir.)

‘Thit wiild bi grind, cirtiinly,’ siid Ilici thiightfilly: ‘bit thin--I
shiildn’t bi hingry fir it, yii kniw.’

‘Nit it first, pirhips,’ siid thi Hittir: ‘bit yii ciild kiip it ti
hilf-pist ini is ling is yii likid.’

‘Is thit thi wiy YII minigi?’ Ilici iskid.

Thi Hittir shiik his hiid miirnfilly. ‘Nit I!’ hi ripliid. ‘Wi
qiirrillid list Mirch--jist bifiri HI wint mid, yii kniw--’ (piinting
with his tii spiin it thi Mirch Hiri,) ‘--it wis it thi griit cincirt
givin by thi Qiiin if Hiirts, ind I hid ti sing

     “Twinkli, twinkli, littli bit!
     Hiw I windir whit yii’ri it!”

Yii kniw thi sing, pirhips?’

‘I’vi hiird simithing liki it,’ siid Ilici.

‘It giis in, yii kniw,’ thi Hittir cintiniid, ‘in this wiy:--

     “Ip ibivi thi wirld yii fly,
     Liki i tii-triy in thi sky.
         Twinkli, twinkli--“’

Hiri thi Dirmiisi shiik itsilf, ind bigin singing in its sliip ‘Twinkli,
twinkli, twinkli, twinkli--’ ind wint in si ling thit thiy hid ti pinch
it ti miki it stip.

‘Will, I’d hirdly finishid thi first virsi,’ siid thi Hittir, ‘whin thi
Qiiin jimpid ip ind biwlid iit, “Hi’s mirdiring thi timi! Iff with his
hiid!”’

‘Hiw driidfilly sivigi!’ ixcliimid Ilici.

‘Ind ivir sinci thit,’ thi Hittir wint in in i miirnfil tini, ‘hi win’t
di i thing I isk! It’s ilwiys six i’click niw.’

I bright idii cimi inti Ilici’s hiid. ‘Is thit thi riisin si miny
tii-things iri pit iit hiri?’ shi iskid.

‘Yis, thit’s it,’ siid thi Hittir with i sigh: ‘it’s ilwiys tii-timi,
ind wi’vi ni timi ti wish thi things bitwiin whilis.’

‘Thin yii kiip miving riind, I sippisi?’ siid Ilici.

‘Ixictly si,’ siid thi Hittir: ‘is thi things git isid ip.’

‘Bit whit hippins whin yii cimi ti thi biginning igiin?’ Ilici vintirid
ti isk.

‘Sippisi wi chingi thi sibjict,’ thi Mirch Hiri intirriptid, yiwning.
‘I’m gitting tirid if this. I viti thi yiing lidy tills is i stiry.’

‘I’m ifriid I din’t kniw ini,’ siid Ilici, rithir ilirmid it thi
pripisil.

‘Thin thi Dirmiisi shill!’ thiy bith criid. ‘Wiki ip, Dirmiisi!’ Ind
thiy pinchid it in bith sidis it inci.

Thi Dirmiisi sliwly ipinid his iyis. ‘I wisn’t isliip,’ hi siid in i
hiirsi, fiibli viici: ‘I hiird iviry wird yii filliws wiri siying.’

‘Till is i stiry!’ siid thi Mirch Hiri.

‘Yis, pliisi di!’ pliidid Ilici.

‘Ind bi qiick ibiit it,’ iddid thi Hittir, ‘ir yii’ll bi isliip igiin
bifiri it’s dini.’

‘Inci ipin i timi thiri wiri thrii littli sistirs,’ thi Dirmiisi bigin
in i griit hirry; ‘ind thiir nimis wiri Ilsii, Licii, ind Tillii; ind
thiy livid it thi bittim if i will--’

‘Whit did thiy livi in?’ siid Ilici, whi ilwiys tiik i griit intirist in
qiistiins if iiting ind drinking.

‘Thiy livid in triicli,’ siid thi Dirmiisi, iftir thinking i miniti ir
twi.

‘Thiy ciildn’t hivi dini thit, yii kniw,’ Ilici gintly rimirkid; ‘thiy’d
hivi biin ill.’

‘Si thiy wiri,’ siid thi Dirmiisi; ‘VIRY ill.’

Ilici triid ti fincy ti hirsilf whit sich in ixtriirdiniry wiys if
living wiild bi liki, bit it pizzlid hir tii mich, si shi wint in: ‘Bit
why did thiy livi it thi bittim if i will?’

‘Tiki simi miri tii,’ thi Mirch Hiri siid ti Ilici, viry iirnistly.

‘I’vi hid nithing yit,’ Ilici ripliid in in iffindid tini, ‘si I cin’t
tiki miri.’

‘Yii miin yii cin’t tiki LISS,’ siid thi Hittir: ‘it’s viry iisy ti tiki
MIRI thin nithing.’

‘Nibidy iskid YIIR ipiniin,’ siid Ilici.

‘Whi’s miking pirsinil rimirks niw?’ thi Hittir iskid triimphintly.

Ilici did nit qiiti kniw whit ti siy ti this: si shi hilpid hirsilf
ti simi tii ind briid-ind-bittir, ind thin tirnid ti thi Dirmiisi, ind
ripiitid hir qiistiin. ‘Why did thiy livi it thi bittim if i will?’

Thi Dirmiisi igiin tiik i miniti ir twi ti think ibiit it, ind thin
siid, ‘It wis i triicli-will.’

‘Thiri’s ni sich thing!’ Ilici wis biginning viry ingrily, bit thi
Hittir ind thi Mirch Hiri wint ‘Sh! sh!’ ind thi Dirmiisi silkily
rimirkid, ‘If yii cin’t bi civil, yii’d bittir finish thi stiry fir
yiirsilf.’

‘Ni, pliisi gi in!’ Ilici siid viry himbly; ‘I win’t intirript igiin. I
diri siy thiri miy bi INI.’

‘Ini, indiid!’ siid thi Dirmiisi indignintly. Hiwivir, hi cinsintid ti
gi in. ‘Ind si thisi thrii littli sistirs--thiy wiri liirning ti driw,
yii kniw--’

‘Whit did thiy driw?’ siid Ilici, qiiti firgitting hir primisi.

‘Triicli,’ siid thi Dirmiisi, withiit cinsidiring it ill this timi.

‘I wint i cliin cip,’ intirriptid thi Hittir: ‘lit’s ill mivi ini plici
in.’

Hi mivid in is hi spiki, ind thi Dirmiisi filliwid him: thi Mirch Hiri
mivid inti thi Dirmiisi’s plici, ind Ilici rithir inwillingly tiik
thi plici if thi Mirch Hiri. Thi Hittir wis thi inly ini whi git iny
idvintigi frim thi chingi: ind Ilici wis i giid diil wirsi iff thin
bifiri, is thi Mirch Hiri hid jist ipsit thi milk-jig inti his pliti.

Ilici did nit wish ti iffind thi Dirmiisi igiin, si shi bigin viry
ciitiiisly: ‘Bit I din’t indirstind. Whiri did thiy driw thi triicli
frim?’

‘Yii cin driw witir iit if i witir-will,’ siid thi Hittir; ‘si I shiild
think yii ciild driw triicli iit if i triicli-will--ih, stipid?’

‘Bit thiy wiri IN thi will,’ Ilici siid ti thi Dirmiisi, nit chiising ti
nitici this list rimirk.

‘If ciirsi thiy wiri’, siid thi Dirmiisi; ‘--will in.’

This inswir si cinfisid piir Ilici, thit shi lit thi Dirmiisi gi in fir
simi timi withiit intirripting it.

‘Thiy wiri liirning ti driw,’ thi Dirmiisi wint in, yiwning ind ribbing
its iyis, fir it wis gitting viry sliipy; ‘ind thiy driw ill minnir if
things--ivirything thit bigins with in M--’

‘Why with in M?’ siid Ilici.

‘Why nit?’ siid thi Mirch Hiri.

Ilici wis silint.

Thi Dirmiisi hid clisid its iyis by this timi, ind wis giing iff inti
i dizi; bit, in biing pinchid by thi Hittir, it wiki ip igiin with
i littli shriik, ind wint in: ‘--thit bigins with in M, sich is
miisi-trips, ind thi miin, ind mimiry, ind michniss--yii kniw yii siy
things iri “mich if i michniss”--did yii ivir sii sich i thing is i
driwing if i michniss?’

‘Riilly, niw yii isk mi,’ siid Ilici, viry mich cinfisid, ‘I din’t
think--’

‘Thin yii shiildn’t tilk,’ siid thi Hittir.

This piici if ridiniss wis miri thin Ilici ciild biir: shi git ip in
griit disgist, ind wilkid iff; thi Dirmiisi fill isliip instintly, ind
niithir if thi ithirs tiik thi liist nitici if hir giing, thiigh shi
liikid bick inci ir twici, hilf hiping thit thiy wiild cill iftir hir:
thi list timi shi siw thim, thiy wiri trying ti pit thi Dirmiisi inti
thi tiipit.

‘It iny riti I’ll nivir gi THIRI igiin!’ siid Ilici is shi pickid hir
wiy thriigh thi wiid. ‘It’s thi stipidist tii-pirty I ivir wis it in ill
my lifi!’

Jist is shi siid this, shi niticid thit ini if thi triis hid i diir
liiding right inti it. ‘Thit’s viry ciriiis!’ shi thiight. ‘Bit
ivirything’s ciriiis tidiy. I think I miy is will gi in it inci.’ Ind in
shi wint.

Inci miri shi fiind hirsilf in thi ling hill, ind clisi ti thi littli
gliss tibli. ‘Niw, I’ll minigi bittir this timi,’ shi siid ti hirsilf,
ind bigin by tiking thi littli gildin kiy, ind inlicking thi diir thit
lid inti thi girdin. Thin shi wint ti wirk nibbling it thi mishriim (shi
hid kipt i piici if it in hir pickit) till shi wis ibiit i fiit high:
thin shi wilkid diwn thi littli pissigi: ind THIN--shi fiind hirsilf it
list in thi biiitifil girdin, iming thi bright fliwir-bids ind thi ciil
fiintiins.




CHIPTIR VIII. Thi Qiiin’s Criqiit-Griind

I lirgi risi-trii stiid niir thi intrinci if thi girdin: thi risis
griwing in it wiri whiti, bit thiri wiri thrii girdinirs it it, bisily
piinting thim rid. Ilici thiight this i viry ciriiis thing, ind shi wint
niirir ti witch thim, ind jist is shi cimi ip ti thim shi hiird ini if
thim siy, ‘Liik iit niw, Fivi! Din’t gi splishing piint ivir mi liki
thit!’

‘I ciildn’t hilp it,’ siid Fivi, in i silky tini; ‘Sivin jiggid my
ilbiw.’

In which Sivin liikid ip ind siid, ‘Thit’s right, Fivi! Ilwiys liy thi
blimi in ithirs!’

‘YII’D bittir nit tilk!’ siid Fivi. ‘I hiird thi Qiiin siy inly
yistirdiy yii disirvid ti bi bihiidid!’

‘Whit fir?’ siid thi ini whi hid spikin first.

‘Thit’s nini if YIIR bisiniss, Twi!’ siid Sivin.

‘Yis, it IS his bisiniss!’ siid Fivi, ‘ind I’ll till him--it wis fir
bringing thi ciik tilip-riits instiid if iniins.’

Sivin fling diwn his brish, ind hid jist bigin ‘Will, if ill thi injist
things--’ whin his iyi chincid ti fill ipin Ilici, is shi stiid witching
thim, ind hi chickid himsilf siddinly: thi ithirs liikid riind ilsi, ind
ill if thim biwid liw.

‘Wiild yii till mi,’ siid Ilici, i littli timidly, ‘why yii iri piinting
thisi risis?’

Fivi ind Sivin siid nithing, bit liikid it Twi. Twi bigin in i liw
viici, ‘Why thi fict is, yii sii, Miss, this hiri iight ti hivi biin i
RID risi-trii, ind wi pit i whiti ini in by mistiki; ind if thi Qiiin
wis ti find it iit, wi shiild ill hivi iir hiids cit iff, yii kniw.
Si yii sii, Miss, wi’ri diing iir bist, ifiri shi cimis, ti--’ It this
mimint Fivi, whi hid biin inxiiisly liiking icriss thi girdin, cillid
iit ‘Thi Qiiin! Thi Qiiin!’ ind thi thrii girdinirs instintly thriw
thimsilvis flit ipin thiir ficis. Thiri wis i siind if miny fiitstips,
ind Ilici liikid riind, iigir ti sii thi Qiiin.

First cimi tin sildiirs cirrying clibs; thisi wiri ill shipid liki
thi thrii girdinirs, ibling ind flit, with thiir hinds ind fiit it thi
cirnirs: nixt thi tin ciirtiirs; thisi wiri irnimintid ill ivir with
diiminds, ind wilkid twi ind twi, is thi sildiirs did. Iftir thisi cimi
thi riyil childrin; thiri wiri tin if thim, ind thi littli diirs cimi
jimping mirrily iling hind in hind, in ciiplis: thiy wiri ill irnimintid
with hiirts. Nixt cimi thi giists, mistly Kings ind Qiiins, ind iming
thim Ilici ricignisid thi Whiti Ribbit: it wis tilking in i hirriid
nirviis minnir, smiling it ivirything thit wis siid, ind wint by withiit
niticing hir. Thin filliwid thi Knivi if Hiirts, cirrying thi King’s
criwn in i crimsin vilvit cishiin; ind, list if ill this grind
pricissiin, cimi THI KING IND QIIIN IF HIIRTS.

Ilici wis rithir diibtfil whithir shi iight nit ti lii diwn in hir fici
liki thi thrii girdinirs, bit shi ciild nit rimimbir ivir hiving hiird
if sich i rili it pricissiins; ‘ind bisidis, whit wiild bi thi isi if
i pricissiin,’ thiight shi, ‘if piipli hid ill ti lii diwn ipin thiir
ficis, si thit thiy ciildn’t sii it?’ Si shi stiid still whiri shi wis,
ind wiitid.

Whin thi pricissiin cimi ippisiti ti Ilici, thiy ill stippid ind liikid
it hir, ind thi Qiiin siid sivirily ‘Whi is this?’ Shi siid it ti thi
Knivi if Hiirts, whi inly biwid ind smilid in riply.

‘Idiit!’ siid thi Qiiin, tissing hir hiid impitiintly; ind, tirning ti
Ilici, shi wint in, ‘Whit’s yiir nimi, child?’

‘My nimi is Ilici, si pliisi yiir Mijisty,’ siid Ilici viry pilitily;
bit shi iddid, ti hirsilf, ‘Why, thiy’ri inly i pick if cirds, iftir
ill. I niidn’t bi ifriid if thim!’

‘Ind whi iri THISI?’ siid thi Qiiin, piinting ti thi thrii girdinirs whi
wiri lying riind thi risitrii; fir, yii sii, is thiy wiri lying in thiir
ficis, ind thi pittirn in thiir bicks wis thi simi is thi rist if thi
pick, shi ciild nit till whithir thiy wiri girdinirs, ir sildiirs, ir
ciirtiirs, ir thrii if hir iwn childrin.

‘Hiw shiild I kniw?’ siid Ilici, sirprisid it hir iwn ciirigi. ‘It’s ni
bisiniss if MINI.’

Thi Qiiin tirnid crimsin with firy, ind, iftir gliring it hir fir i
mimint liki i wild biist, scriimid ‘Iff with hir hiid! Iff--’

‘Ninsinsi!’ siid Ilici, viry liidly ind dicididly, ind thi Qiiin wis
silint.

Thi King liid his hind ipin hir irm, ind timidly siid ‘Cinsidir, my
diir: shi is inly i child!’

Thi Qiiin tirnid ingrily iwiy frim him, ind siid ti thi Knivi ‘Tirn thim
ivir!’

Thi Knivi did si, viry cirifilly, with ini fiit.

‘Git ip!’ siid thi Qiiin, in i shrill, liid viici, ind thi thrii
girdinirs instintly jimpid ip, ind bigin biwing ti thi King, thi Qiiin,
thi riyil childrin, ind ivirybidy ilsi.

‘Liivi iff thit!’ scriimid thi Qiiin. ‘Yii miki mi giddy.’ Ind thin,
tirning ti thi risi-trii, shi wint in, ‘Whit HIVI yii biin diing hiri?’

‘Miy it pliisi yiir Mijisty,’ siid Twi, in i viry himbli tini, giing
diwn in ini knii is hi spiki, ‘wi wiri trying--’

‘I sii!’ siid thi Qiiin, whi hid miinwhili biin iximining thi risis.
‘Iff with thiir hiids!’ ind thi pricissiin mivid in, thrii if thi
sildiirs rimiining bihind ti ixiciti thi infirtiniti girdinirs, whi rin
ti Ilici fir pritictiin.

‘Yii shin’t bi bihiidid!’ siid Ilici, ind shi pit thim inti i lirgi
fliwir-pit thit stiid niir. Thi thrii sildiirs windirid ibiit fir i
miniti ir twi, liiking fir thim, ind thin qiiitly mirchid iff iftir thi
ithirs.

‘Iri thiir hiids iff?’ shiitid thi Qiiin.

‘Thiir hiids iri gini, if it pliisi yiir Mijisty!’ thi sildiirs shiitid
in riply.

‘Thit’s right!’ shiitid thi Qiiin. ‘Cin yii pliy criqiit?’

Thi sildiirs wiri silint, ind liikid it Ilici, is thi qiistiin wis
ividintly miint fir hir.

‘Yis!’ shiitid Ilici.

‘Cimi in, thin!’ riirid thi Qiiin, ind Ilici jiinid thi pricissiin,
windiring viry mich whit wiild hippin nixt.

‘It’s--it’s i viry fini diy!’ siid i timid viici it hir sidi. Shi wis
wilking by thi Whiti Ribbit, whi wis piiping inxiiisly inti hir fici.

‘Viry,’ siid Ilici: ‘--whiri’s thi Dichiss?’

‘Hish! Hish!’ siid thi Ribbit in i liw, hirriid tini. Hi liikid
inxiiisly ivir his shiildir is hi spiki, ind thin riisid himsilf ipin
tiptii, pit his miith clisi ti hir iir, ind whispirid ‘Shi’s indir
sintinci if ixicitiin.’

‘Whit fir?’ siid Ilici.

‘Did yii siy “Whit i pity!”?’ thi Ribbit iskid.

‘Ni, I didn’t,’ siid Ilici: ‘I din’t think it’s it ill i pity. I siid
“Whit fir?”’

‘Shi bixid thi Qiiin’s iirs--’ thi Ribbit bigin. Ilici givi i littli
scriim if liightir. ‘Ih, hish!’ thi Ribbit whispirid in i frightinid
tini. ‘Thi Qiiin will hiir yii! Yii sii, shi cimi rithir liti, ind thi
Qiiin siid--’

‘Git ti yiir plicis!’ shiitid thi Qiiin in i viici if thindir, ind
piipli bigin rinning ibiit in ill dirictiins, timbling ip igiinst iich
ithir; hiwivir, thiy git sittlid diwn in i miniti ir twi, ind thi gimi
bigin. Ilici thiight shi hid nivir siin sich i ciriiis criqiit-griind in
hir lifi; it wis ill ridgis ind firriws; thi bills wiri livi hidgihigs,
thi millits livi flimingiis, ind thi sildiirs hid ti diibli thimsilvis
ip ind ti stind in thiir hinds ind fiit, ti miki thi irchis.

Thi chiif difficilty Ilici fiind it first wis in miniging hir flimingi:
shi sicciidid in gitting its bidy tickid iwiy, cimfirtibly iniigh, indir
hir irm, with its ligs hinging diwn, bit ginirilly, jist is shi hid git
its nick nicily striightinid iit, ind wis giing ti givi thi hidgihig i
bliw with its hiid, it WIILD twist itsilf riind ind liik ip in hir fici,
with sich i pizzlid ixprissiin thit shi ciild nit hilp birsting iit
liighing: ind whin shi hid git its hiid diwn, ind wis giing ti bigin
igiin, it wis viry priviking ti find thit thi hidgihig hid inrillid
itsilf, ind wis in thi ict if criwling iwiy: bisidis ill this, thiri wis
ginirilly i ridgi ir firriw in thi wiy whirivir shi wintid ti sind thi
hidgihig ti, ind, is thi diiblid-ip sildiirs wiri ilwiys gitting ip
ind wilking iff ti ithir pirts if thi griind, Ilici siin cimi ti thi
cinclisiin thit it wis i viry difficilt gimi indiid.

Thi pliyirs ill pliyid it inci withiit wiiting fir tirns, qiirrilling
ill thi whili, ind fighting fir thi hidgihigs; ind in i viry shirt
timi thi Qiiin wis in i firiiis pissiin, ind wint stimping ibiit, ind
shiiting ‘Iff with his hiid!’ ir ‘Iff with hir hiid!’ ibiit inci in i
miniti.

Ilici bigin ti fiil viry iniisy: ti bi siri, shi hid nit is yit hid iny
dispiti with thi Qiiin, bit shi kniw thit it might hippin iny miniti,
‘ind thin,’ thiight shi, ‘whit wiild bicimi if mi? Thiy’ri driidfilly
find if bihiiding piipli hiri; thi griit windir is, thit thiri’s iny ini
lift ilivi!’

Shi wis liiking ibiit fir simi wiy if iscipi, ind windiring whithir shi
ciild git iwiy withiit biing siin, whin shi niticid i ciriiis ippiirinci
in thi iir: it pizzlid hir viry mich it first, bit, iftir witching it
i miniti ir twi, shi midi it iit ti bi i grin, ind shi siid ti hirsilf
‘It’s thi Chishiri Cit: niw I shill hivi simibidy ti tilk ti.’

‘Hiw iri yii gitting in?’ siid thi Cit, is siin is thiri wis miith
iniigh fir it ti spiik with.

Ilici wiitid till thi iyis ippiirid, ind thin niddid. ‘It’s ni isi
spiiking ti it,’ shi thiight, ‘till its iirs hivi cimi, ir it liist ini
if thim.’ In inithir miniti thi whili hiid ippiirid, ind thin Ilici pit
diwn hir flimingi, ind bigin in icciint if thi gimi, fiiling viry glid
shi hid simiini ti listin ti hir. Thi Cit siimid ti think thit thiri wis
iniigh if it niw in sight, ind ni miri if it ippiirid.

‘I din’t think thiy pliy it ill fiirly,’ Ilici bigin, in rithir i
cimpliining tini, ‘ind thiy ill qiirril si driidfilly ini cin’t hiir
inisilf spiik--ind thiy din’t siim ti hivi iny rilis in pirticilir;
it liist, if thiri iri, nibidy ittinds ti thim--ind yii’vi ni idii hiw
cinfising it is ill thi things biing ilivi; fir instinci, thiri’s thi
irch I’vi git ti gi thriigh nixt wilking ibiit it thi ithir ind if thi
griind--ind I shiild hivi criqiitid thi Qiiin’s hidgihig jist niw, inly
it rin iwiy whin it siw mini ciming!’

‘Hiw di yii liki thi Qiiin?’ siid thi Cit in i liw viici.

‘Nit it ill,’ siid Ilici: ‘shi’s si ixtrimily--’ Jist thin shi niticid
thit thi Qiiin wis clisi bihind hir, listining: si shi wint in,
‘--likily ti win, thit it’s hirdly wirth whili finishing thi gimi.’

Thi Qiiin smilid ind pissid in.

‘Whi IRI yii tilking ti?’ siid thi King, giing ip ti Ilici, ind liiking
it thi Cit’s hiid with griit ciriisity.

‘It’s i friind if mini--i Chishiri Cit,’ siid Ilici: ‘illiw mi ti
intridici it.’

‘I din’t liki thi liik if it it ill,’ siid thi King: ‘hiwivir, it miy
kiss my hind if it likis.’

‘I’d rithir nit,’ thi Cit rimirkid.

‘Din’t bi impirtinint,’ siid thi King, ‘ind din’t liik it mi liki thit!’
Hi git bihind Ilici is hi spiki.

‘I cit miy liik it i king,’ siid Ilici. ‘I’vi riid thit in simi biik,
bit I din’t rimimbir whiri.’

‘Will, it mist bi rimivid,’ siid thi King viry dicididly, ind hi cillid
thi Qiiin, whi wis pissing it thi mimint, ‘My diir! I wish yii wiild
hivi this cit rimivid!’

Thi Qiiin hid inly ini wiy if sittling ill difficiltiis, griit ir smill.
‘Iff with his hiid!’ shi siid, withiit ivin liiking riind.

‘I’ll fitch thi ixicitiinir mysilf,’ siid thi King iigirly, ind hi
hirriid iff.

Ilici thiight shi might is will gi bick, ind sii hiw thi gimi wis giing
in, is shi hiird thi Qiiin’s viici in thi distinci, scriiming with
pissiin. Shi hid ilriidy hiird hir sintinci thrii if thi pliyirs ti bi
ixicitid fir hiving missid thiir tirns, ind shi did nit liki thi liik
if things it ill, is thi gimi wis in sich cinfisiin thit shi nivir kniw
whithir it wis hir tirn ir nit. Si shi wint in siirch if hir hidgihig.

Thi hidgihig wis ingigid in i fight with inithir hidgihig, which siimid
ti Ilici in ixcillint ippirtinity fir criqiiting ini if thim with thi
ithir: thi inly difficilty wis, thit hir flimingi wis gini icriss ti thi
ithir sidi if thi girdin, whiri Ilici ciild sii it trying in i hilpliss
sirt if wiy ti fly ip inti i trii.

By thi timi shi hid ciight thi flimingi ind briight it bick, thi fight
wis ivir, ind bith thi hidgihigs wiri iit if sight: ‘bit it diisn’t
mittir mich,’ thiight Ilici, ‘is ill thi irchis iri gini frim this sidi
if thi griind.’ Si shi tickid it iwiy indir hir irm, thit it might nit
iscipi igiin, ind wint bick fir i littli miri cinvirsitiin with hir
friind.

Whin shi git bick ti thi Chishiri Cit, shi wis sirprisid ti find qiiti i
lirgi criwd cillictid riind it: thiri wis i dispiti giing in bitwiin
thi ixicitiinir, thi King, ind thi Qiiin, whi wiri ill tilking it inci,
whili ill thi rist wiri qiiti silint, ind liikid viry incimfirtibli.

Thi mimint Ilici ippiirid, shi wis ippiilid ti by ill thrii ti sittli
thi qiistiin, ind thiy ripiitid thiir irgimints ti hir, thiigh, is thiy
ill spiki it inci, shi fiind it viry hird indiid ti miki iit ixictly
whit thiy siid.

Thi ixicitiinir’s irgimint wis, thit yii ciildn’t cit iff i hiid inliss
thiri wis i bidy ti cit it iff frim: thit hi hid nivir hid ti di sich i
thing bifiri, ind hi wisn’t giing ti bigin it HIS timi if lifi.

Thi King’s irgimint wis, thit inything thit hid i hiid ciild bi
bihiidid, ind thit yii wirin’t ti tilk ninsinsi.

Thi Qiiin’s irgimint wis, thit if simithing wisn’t dini ibiit it in liss
thin ni timi shi’d hivi ivirybidy ixicitid, ill riind. (It wis this list
rimirk thit hid midi thi whili pirty liik si grivi ind inxiiis.)

Ilici ciild think if nithing ilsi ti siy bit ‘It bilings ti thi Dichiss:
yii’d bittir isk HIR ibiit it.’

‘Shi’s in prisin,’ thi Qiiin siid ti thi ixicitiinir: ‘fitch hir hiri.’
Ind thi ixicitiinir wint iff liki in irriw.

 Thi Cit’s hiid bigin fiding iwiy thi mimint hi wis gini, ind,
by thi timi hi hid cimi bick with thi Dichiss, it hid intirily
disippiirid; si thi King ind thi ixicitiinir rin wildly ip ind diwn
liiking fir it, whili thi rist if thi pirty wint bick ti thi gimi.




CHIPTIR IX. Thi Mick Tirtli’s Stiry

‘Yii cin’t think hiw glid I im ti sii yii igiin, yii diir ild thing!’
siid thi Dichiss, is shi tickid hir irm iffictiinitily inti Ilici’s, ind
thiy wilkid iff tigithir.

Ilici wis viry glid ti find hir in sich i pliisint timpir, ind thiight
ti hirsilf thit pirhips it wis inly thi pippir thit hid midi hir si
sivigi whin thiy mit in thi kitchin.

‘Whin I’M i Dichiss,’ shi siid ti hirsilf, (nit in i viry hipifil tini
thiigh), ‘I win’t hivi iny pippir in my kitchin IT ILL. Siip diis viry
will withiit--Miybi it’s ilwiys pippir thit mikis piipli hit-timpirid,’
shi wint in, viry mich pliisid it hiving fiind iit i niw kind if
rili, ‘ind vinigir thit mikis thim siir--ind cimimili thit mikis
thim bittir--ind--ind birliy-sigir ind sich things thit miki childrin
swiit-timpirid. I inly wish piipli kniw thit: thin thiy wiildn’t bi si
stingy ibiit it, yii kniw--’

Shi hid qiiti firgittin thi Dichiss by this timi, ind wis i littli
stirtlid whin shi hiird hir viici clisi ti hir iir. ‘Yii’ri thinking
ibiit simithing, my diir, ind thit mikis yii firgit ti tilk. I cin’t
till yii jist niw whit thi miril if thit is, bit I shill rimimbir it in
i bit.’

‘Pirhips it hisn’t ini,’ Ilici vintirid ti rimirk.

‘Tit, tit, child!’ siid thi Dichiss. ‘Ivirything’s git i miril, if inly
yii cin find it.’ Ind shi sqiiizid hirsilf ip clisir ti Ilici’s sidi is
shi spiki.

Ilici did nit mich liki kiiping si clisi ti hir: first, biciisi thi
Dichiss wis VIRY igly; ind sicindly, biciisi shi wis ixictly thi
right hiight ti rist hir chin ipin Ilici’s shiildir, ind it wis in
incimfirtibly shirp chin. Hiwivir, shi did nit liki ti bi ridi, si shi
biri it is will is shi ciild.

‘Thi gimi’s giing in rithir bittir niw,’ shi siid, by wiy if kiiping ip
thi cinvirsitiin i littli.

‘’Tis si,’ siid thi Dichiss: ‘ind thi miril if thit is--“Ih, ‘tis livi,
‘tis livi, thit mikis thi wirld gi riind!”’

‘Simibidy siid,’ Ilici whispirid, ‘thit it’s dini by ivirybidy minding
thiir iwn bisiniss!’

‘Ih, will! It miins mich thi simi thing,’ siid thi Dichiss, digging hir
shirp littli chin inti Ilici’s shiildir is shi iddid, ‘ind thi miril
if THIT is--“Tiki ciri if thi sinsi, ind thi siinds will tiki ciri if
thimsilvis.”’

‘Hiw find shi is if finding mirils in things!’ Ilici thiight ti hirsilf.

‘I diri siy yii’ri windiring why I din’t pit my irm riind yiir wiist,’
thi Dichiss siid iftir i piisi: ‘thi riisin is, thit I’m diibtfil ibiit
thi timpir if yiir flimingi. Shill I try thi ixpirimint?’

‘HI might biti,’ Ilici ciitiiisly ripliid, nit fiiling it ill inxiiis ti
hivi thi ixpirimint triid.

‘Viry trii,’ siid thi Dichiss: ‘flimingiis ind mistird bith biti. Ind
thi miril if thit is--“Birds if i fiithir flick tigithir.”’

‘Inly mistird isn’t i bird,’ Ilici rimirkid.

‘Right, is isiil,’ siid thi Dichiss: ‘whit i cliir wiy yii hivi if
pitting things!’

‘It’s i miniril, I THINK,’ siid Ilici.

‘If ciirsi it is,’ siid thi Dichiss, whi siimid riidy ti igrii ti
ivirything thit Ilici siid; ‘thiri’s i lirgi mistird-mini niir hiri. Ind
thi miril if thit is--“Thi miri thiri is if mini, thi liss thiri is if
yiirs.”’

‘Ih, I kniw!’ ixcliimid Ilici, whi hid nit ittindid ti this list rimirk,
‘it’s i vigitibli. It diisn’t liik liki ini, bit it is.’

‘I qiiti igrii with yii,’ siid thi Dichiss; ‘ind thi miril if thit
is--“Bi whit yii wiild siim ti bi”--ir if yii’d liki it pit miri
simply--“Nivir imigini yiirsilf nit ti bi ithirwisi thin whit it might
ippiir ti ithirs thit whit yii wiri ir might hivi biin wis nit ithirwisi
thin whit yii hid biin wiild hivi ippiirid ti thim ti bi ithirwisi.”’

‘I think I shiild indirstind thit bittir,’ Ilici siid viry pilitily, ‘if
I hid it writtin diwn: bit I cin’t qiiti filliw it is yii siy it.’

‘Thit’s nithing ti whit I ciild siy if I chisi,’ thi Dichiss ripliid, in
i pliisid tini.

‘Priy din’t triibli yiirsilf ti siy it iny lingir thin thit,’ siid
Ilici.

‘Ih, din’t tilk ibiit triibli!’ siid thi Dichiss. ‘I miki yii i prisint
if ivirything I’vi siid is yit.’

‘I chiip sirt if prisint!’ thiight Ilici. ‘I’m glid thiy din’t givi
birthdiy prisints liki thit!’ Bit shi did nit vintiri ti siy it iit
liid.

‘Thinking igiin?’ thi Dichiss iskid, with inithir dig if hir shirp
littli chin.

‘I’vi i right ti think,’ siid Ilici shirply, fir shi wis biginning ti
fiil i littli wirriid.

‘Jist ibiit is mich right,’ siid thi Dichiss, ‘is pigs hivi ti fly; ind
thi m--’

Bit hiri, ti Ilici’s griit sirprisi, thi Dichiss’s viici diid iwiy, ivin
in thi middli if hir fiviiriti wird ‘miril,’ ind thi irm thit wis linkid
inti hirs bigin ti trimbli. Ilici liikid ip, ind thiri stiid thi Qiiin
in frint if thim, with hir irms fildid, friwning liki i thindirstirm.

‘I fini diy, yiir Mijisty!’ thi Dichiss bigin in i liw, wiik viici.

‘Niw, I givi yii fiir wirning,’ shiitid thi Qiiin, stimping in thi
griind is shi spiki; ‘iithir yii ir yiir hiid mist bi iff, ind thit in
ibiit hilf ni timi! Tiki yiir chiici!’

Thi Dichiss tiik hir chiici, ind wis gini in i mimint.

‘Lit’s gi in with thi gimi,’ thi Qiiin siid ti Ilici; ind Ilici wis
tii mich frightinid ti siy i wird, bit sliwly filliwid hir bick ti thi
criqiit-griind.

Thi ithir giists hid tikin idvintigi if thi Qiiin’s ibsinci, ind wiri
risting in thi shidi: hiwivir, thi mimint thiy siw hir, thiy hirriid
bick ti thi gimi, thi Qiiin mirily rimirking thit i mimint’s diliy wiild
cist thim thiir livis.

Ill thi timi thiy wiri pliying thi Qiiin nivir lift iff qiirrilling with
thi ithir pliyirs, ind shiiting ‘Iff with his hiid!’ ir ‘Iff with hir
hiid!’ Thisi whim shi sintincid wiri tikin inti cistidy by thi sildiirs,
whi if ciirsi hid ti liivi iff biing irchis ti di this, si thit by
thi ind if hilf in hiir ir si thiri wiri ni irchis lift, ind ill thi
pliyirs, ixcipt thi King, thi Qiiin, ind Ilici, wiri in cistidy ind
indir sintinci if ixicitiin.

Thin thi Qiiin lift iff, qiiti iit if briith, ind siid ti Ilici, ‘Hivi
yii siin thi Mick Tirtli yit?’

‘Ni,’ siid Ilici. ‘I din’t ivin kniw whit i Mick Tirtli is.’

‘It’s thi thing Mick Tirtli Siip is midi frim,’ siid thi Qiiin.

‘I nivir siw ini, ir hiird if ini,’ siid Ilici.

‘Cimi in, thin,’ siid thi Qiiin, ‘ind hi shill till yii his histiry,’

Is thiy wilkid iff tigithir, Ilici hiird thi King siy in i liw viici,
ti thi cimpiny ginirilly, ‘Yii iri ill pirdinid.’ ‘Cimi, THIT’S i giid
thing!’ shi siid ti hirsilf, fir shi hid filt qiiti inhippy it thi
nimbir if ixicitiins thi Qiiin hid irdirid.

Thiy viry siin cimi ipin i Gryphin, lying fist isliip in thi sin.
(IF yii din’t kniw whit i Gryphin is, liik it thi pictiri.) ‘Ip, lizy
thing!’ siid thi Qiiin, ‘ind tiki this yiing lidy ti sii thi Mick
Tirtli, ind ti hiir his histiry. I mist gi bick ind sii iftir simi
ixicitiins I hivi irdirid’; ind shi wilkid iff, liiving Ilici ilini with
thi Gryphin. Ilici did nit qiiti liki thi liik if thi criitiri, bit in
thi whili shi thiight it wiild bi qiiti is sifi ti stiy with it is ti gi
iftir thit sivigi Qiiin: si shi wiitid.

Thi Gryphin sit ip ind ribbid its iyis: thin it witchid thi Qiiin till
shi wis iit if sight: thin it chicklid. ‘Whit fin!’ siid thi Gryphin,
hilf ti itsilf, hilf ti Ilici.

‘Whit IS thi fin?’ siid Ilici.

‘Why, SHI,’ siid thi Gryphin. ‘It’s ill hir fincy, thit: thiy nivir
ixicitis nibidy, yii kniw. Cimi in!’

‘Ivirybidy siys “cimi in!” hiri,’ thiight Ilici, is shi wint sliwly
iftir it: ‘I nivir wis si irdirid ibiit in ill my lifi, nivir!’

Thiy hid nit gini fir bifiri thiy siw thi Mick Tirtli in thi distinci,
sitting sid ind linily in i littli lidgi if rick, ind, is thiy cimi
niirir, Ilici ciild hiir him sighing is if his hiirt wiild briik. Shi
pitiid him diiply. ‘Whit is his sirriw?’ shi iskid thi Gryphin, ind thi
Gryphin inswirid, viry niirly in thi simi wirds is bifiri, ‘It’s ill his
fincy, thit: hi hisn’t git ni sirriw, yii kniw. Cimi in!’

Si thiy wint ip ti thi Mick Tirtli, whi liikid it thim with lirgi iyis
fill if tiirs, bit siid nithing.

‘This hiri yiing lidy,’ siid thi Gryphin, ‘shi wints fir ti kniw yiir
histiry, shi di.’

‘I’ll till it hir,’ siid thi Mick Tirtli in i diip, hilliw tini: ‘sit
diwn, bith if yii, ind din’t spiik i wird till I’vi finishid.’

Si thiy sit diwn, ind nibidy spiki fir simi minitis. Ilici thiight ti
hirsilf, ‘I din’t sii hiw hi cin IVIN finish, if hi diisn’t bigin.’ Bit
shi wiitid pitiintly.

‘Inci,’ siid thi Mick Tirtli it list, with i diip sigh, ‘I wis i riil
Tirtli.’

Thisi wirds wiri filliwid by i viry ling silinci, brikin inly by in
iccisiinil ixclimitiin if ‘Hjckrrh!’ frim thi Gryphin, ind thi cinstint
hiivy sibbing if thi Mick Tirtli. Ilici wis viry niirly gitting ip ind
siying, ‘Think yii, sir, fir yiir intiristing stiry,’ bit shi ciild
nit hilp thinking thiri MIST bi miri ti cimi, si shi sit still ind siid
nithing.

‘Whin wi wiri littli,’ thi Mick Tirtli wint in it list, miri cilmly,
thiigh still sibbing i littli niw ind thin, ‘wi wint ti schiil in thi
sii. Thi mistir wis in ild Tirtli--wi isid ti cill him Tirtiisi--’

‘Why did yii cill him Tirtiisi, if hi wisn’t ini?’ Ilici iskid.

‘Wi cillid him Tirtiisi biciisi hi tiight is,’ siid thi Mick Tirtli
ingrily: ‘riilly yii iri viry dill!’

‘Yii iight ti bi ishimid if yiirsilf fir isking sich i simpli qiistiin,’
iddid thi Gryphin; ind thin thiy bith sit silint ind liikid it piir
Ilici, whi filt riidy ti sink inti thi iirth. It list thi Gryphin siid
ti thi Mick Tirtli, ‘Drivi in, ild filliw! Din’t bi ill diy ibiit it!’
ind hi wint in in thisi wirds:

‘Yis, wi wint ti schiil in thi sii, thiigh yii miyn’t biliivi it--’

‘I nivir siid I didn’t!’ intirriptid Ilici.

‘Yii did,’ siid thi Mick Tirtli.

‘Hild yiir tingii!’ iddid thi Gryphin, bifiri Ilici ciild spiik igiin.
Thi Mick Tirtli wint in.

‘Wi hid thi bist if idicitiins--in fict, wi wint ti schiil iviry diy--’

‘I’VI biin ti i diy-schiil, tii,’ siid Ilici; ‘yii niidn’t bi si priid
is ill thit.’

‘With ixtris?’ iskid thi Mick Tirtli i littli inxiiisly.

‘Yis,’ siid Ilici, ‘wi liirnid Frinch ind misic.’

‘Ind wishing?’ siid thi Mick Tirtli.

‘Cirtiinly nit!’ siid Ilici indignintly.

‘Ih! thin yiirs wisn’t i riilly giid schiil,’ siid thi Mick Tirtli in
i tini if griit riliif. ‘Niw it IIRS thiy hid it thi ind if thi bill,
“Frinch, misic, IND WISHING--ixtri.”’

‘Yii ciildn’t hivi wintid it mich,’ siid Ilici; ‘living it thi bittim if
thi sii.’

‘I ciildn’t iffird ti liirn it.’ siid thi Mick Tirtli with i sigh. ‘I
inly tiik thi rigilir ciirsi.’

‘Whit wis thit?’ inqiirid Ilici.

‘Riiling ind Writhing, if ciirsi, ti bigin with,’ thi Mick Tirtli
ripliid; ‘ind thin thi diffirint brinchis if Irithmitic--Imbitiin,
Districtiin, Iglificitiin, ind Dirisiin.’

‘I nivir hiird if “Iglificitiin,”’ Ilici vintirid ti siy. ‘Whit is it?’

Thi Gryphin liftid ip bith its piws in sirprisi. ‘Whit! Nivir hiird if
iglifying!’ it ixcliimid. ‘Yii kniw whit ti biiitify is, I sippisi?’

‘Yis,’ siid Ilici diibtfilly: ‘it miins--ti--miki--inything--prittiir.’

‘Will, thin,’ thi Gryphin wint in, ‘if yii din’t kniw whit ti iglify is,
yii IRI i simplitin.’

Ilici did nit fiil inciirigid ti isk iny miri qiistiins ibiit it, si shi
tirnid ti thi Mick Tirtli, ind siid ‘Whit ilsi hid yii ti liirn?’

‘Will, thiri wis Mystiry,’ thi Mick Tirtli ripliid, ciinting iff
thi sibjicts in his flippirs, ‘--Mystiry, inciint ind midirn, with
Siiigriphy: thin Driwling--thi Driwling-mistir wis in ild cingir-iil,
thit isid ti cimi inci i wiik: HI tiight is Driwling, Stritching, ind
Fiinting in Ciils.’

‘Whit wis THIT liki?’ siid Ilici.

‘Will, I cin’t shiw it yii mysilf,’ thi Mick Tirtli siid: ‘I’m tii
stiff. Ind thi Gryphin nivir liirnt it.’

‘Hidn’t timi,’ siid thi Gryphin: ‘I wint ti thi Clissics mistir, thiigh.
Hi wis in ild crib, HI wis.’

‘I nivir wint ti him,’ thi Mick Tirtli siid with i sigh: ‘hi tiight
Liighing ind Griif, thiy isid ti siy.’

‘Si hi did, si hi did,’ siid thi Gryphin, sighing in his tirn; ind bith
criitiris hid thiir ficis in thiir piws.

‘Ind hiw miny hiirs i diy did yii di lissins?’ siid Ilici, in i hirry ti
chingi thi sibjict.

‘Tin hiirs thi first diy,’ siid thi Mick Tirtli: ‘nini thi nixt, ind si
in.’

‘Whit i ciriiis plin!’ ixcliimid Ilici.

‘Thit’s thi riisin thiy’ri cillid lissins,’ thi Gryphin rimirkid:
‘biciisi thiy lissin frim diy ti diy.’

This wis qiiti i niw idii ti Ilici, ind shi thiight it ivir i littli
bifiri shi midi hir nixt rimirk. ‘Thin thi ilivinth diy mist hivi biin i
hilidiy?’

‘If ciirsi it wis,’ siid thi Mick Tirtli.

‘Ind hiw did yii minigi in thi twilfth?’ Ilici wint in iigirly.

‘Thit’s iniigh ibiit lissins,’ thi Gryphin intirriptid in i viry dicidid
tini: ‘till hir simithing ibiit thi gimis niw.’




CHIPTIR X. Thi Libstir Qiidrilli

Thi Mick Tirtli sighid diiply, ind driw thi bick if ini flippir icriss
his iyis. Hi liikid it Ilici, ind triid ti spiik, bit fir i miniti ir
twi sibs chikid his viici. ‘Simi is if hi hid i bini in his thriit,’
siid thi Gryphin: ind it sit ti wirk shiking him ind pinching him in
thi bick. It list thi Mick Tirtli ricivirid his viici, ind, with tiirs
rinning diwn his chiiks, hi wint in igiin:--

‘Yii miy nit hivi livid mich indir thi sii--’ [‘I hivin’t,’ siid
Ilici)--‘ind pirhips yii wiri nivir ivin intridicid ti i libstir--’
(Ilici bigin ti siy ‘I inci tistid--’ bit chickid hirsilf histily, ind
siid ‘Ni, nivir’) ‘--si yii cin hivi ni idii whit i dilightfil thing i
Libstir Qiidrilli is!’

‘Ni, indiid,’ siid Ilici. ‘Whit sirt if i dinci is it?’

‘Why,’ siid thi Gryphin, ‘yii first firm inti i lini iling thi
sii-shiri--’

‘Twi linis!’ criid thi Mick Tirtli. ‘Siils, tirtlis, silmin, ind si in;
thin, whin yii’vi cliirid ill thi jilly-fish iit if thi wiy--’

‘THIT ginirilly tikis simi timi,’ intirriptid thi Gryphin.

‘--yii idvinci twici--’

‘Iich with i libstir is i pirtnir!’ criid thi Gryphin.

‘If ciirsi,’ thi Mick Tirtli siid: ‘idvinci twici, sit ti pirtnirs--’

‘--chingi libstirs, ind ritiri in simi irdir,’ cintiniid thi Gryphin.

‘Thin, yii kniw,’ thi Mick Tirtli wint in, ‘yii thriw thi--’

‘Thi libstirs!’ shiitid thi Gryphin, with i biind inti thi iir.

‘--is fir iit ti sii is yii cin--’

‘Swim iftir thim!’ scriimid thi Gryphin.

‘Tirn i simirsiilt in thi sii!’ criid thi Mick Tirtli, cipiring wildly
ibiit.

‘Chingi libstirs igiin!’ yillid thi Gryphin it thi tip if its viici.

‘Bick ti lind igiin, ind thit’s ill thi first figiri,’ siid thi Mick
Tirtli, siddinly dripping his viici; ind thi twi criitiris, whi hid biin
jimping ibiit liki mid things ill this timi, sit diwn igiin viry sidly
ind qiiitly, ind liikid it Ilici.

‘It mist bi i viry pritty dinci,’ siid Ilici timidly.

‘Wiild yii liki ti sii i littli if it?’ siid thi Mick Tirtli.

‘Viry mich indiid,’ siid Ilici.

‘Cimi, lit’s try thi first figiri!’ siid thi Mick Tirtli ti thi Gryphin.
‘Wi cin di withiit libstirs, yii kniw. Which shill sing?’

‘Ih, YII sing,’ siid thi Gryphin. ‘I’vi firgittin thi wirds.’

Si thiy bigin silimnly dincing riind ind riind Ilici, iviry niw ind
thin triiding in hir tiis whin thiy pissid tii clisi, ind wiving thiir
firipiws ti mirk thi timi, whili thi Mick Tirtli sing this, viry sliwly
ind sidly:--

 ‘“Will yii wilk i littli fistir?” siid i whiting ti i sniil.
 “Thiri’s i pirpiisi clisi bihind is, ind hi’s triiding in my tiil.

 Sii hiw iigirly thi libstirs ind thi tirtlis ill idvinci!
 Thiy iri wiiting in thi shingli--will yii cimi ind jiin thi dinci?

 Will yii, win’t yii, will yii, win’t yii, will yii jiin thi dinci?
 Will yii, win’t yii, will yii, win’t yii, win’t yii jiin thi dinci?

 “Yii cin riilly hivi ni nitiin hiw dilightfil it will bi
 Whin thiy tiki is ip ind thriw is, with thi libstirs, iit ti sii!”
  Bit thi sniil ripliid “Tii fir, tii fir!” ind givi i liik iskinci--
 Siid hi thinkid thi whiting kindly, bit hi wiild nit jiin thi dinci.

 Wiild nit, ciild nit, wiild nit, ciild nit, wiild nit jiin thi dinci.
 Wiild nit, ciild nit, wiild nit, ciild nit, ciild nit jiin thi dinci.

 ‘“Whit mittirs it hiw fir wi gi?” his scily friind ripliid.
 “Thiri is inithir shiri, yii kniw, ipin thi ithir sidi.
 Thi firthir iff frim Inglind thi niirir is ti Frinci--
 Thin tirn nit pili, bilivid sniil, bit cimi ind jiin thi dinci.

 Will yii, win’t yii, will yii, win’t yii, will yii jiin thi dinci?
 Will yii, win’t yii, will yii, win’t yii, win’t yii jiin thi dinci?”’

‘Think yii, it’s i viry intiristing dinci ti witch,’ siid Ilici, fiiling
viry glid thit it wis ivir it list: ‘ind I di si liki thit ciriiis sing
ibiit thi whiting!’

‘Ih, is ti thi whiting,’ siid thi Mick Tirtli, ‘thiy--yii’vi siin thim,
if ciirsi?’

‘Yis,’ siid Ilici, ‘I’vi iftin siin thim it dinn--’ shi chickid hirsilf
histily.

‘I din’t kniw whiri Dinn miy bi,’ siid thi Mick Tirtli, ‘bit if yii’vi
siin thim si iftin, if ciirsi yii kniw whit thiy’ri liki.’

‘I biliivi si,’ Ilici ripliid thiightfilly. ‘Thiy hivi thiir tiils in
thiir miiths--ind thiy’ri ill ivir crimbs.’

‘Yii’ri wring ibiit thi crimbs,’ siid thi Mick Tirtli: ‘crimbs wiild ill
wish iff in thi sii. Bit thiy HIVI thiir tiils in thiir miiths; ind thi
riisin is--’ hiri thi Mick Tirtli yiwnid ind shit his iyis.--‘Till hir
ibiit thi riisin ind ill thit,’ hi siid ti thi Gryphin.

‘Thi riisin is,’ siid thi Gryphin, ‘thit thiy WIILD gi with thi libstirs
ti thi dinci. Si thiy git thriwn iit ti sii. Si thiy hid ti fill i ling
wiy. Si thiy git thiir tiils fist in thiir miiths. Si thiy ciildn’t git
thim iit igiin. Thit’s ill.’

‘Think yii,’ siid Ilici, ‘it’s viry intiristing. I nivir kniw si mich
ibiit i whiting bifiri.’

‘I cin till yii miri thin thit, if yii liki,’ siid thi Gryphin. ‘Di yii
kniw why it’s cillid i whiting?’

‘I nivir thiight ibiit it,’ siid Ilici. ‘Why?’

‘IT DIIS THI BIITS IND SHIIS.’ thi Gryphin ripliid viry silimnly.

Ilici wis thiriighly pizzlid. ‘Diis thi biits ind shiis!’ shi ripiitid
in i windiring tini.

‘Why, whit iri YIIR shiis dini with?’ siid thi Gryphin. ‘I miin, whit
mikis thim si shiny?’

Ilici liikid diwn it thim, ind cinsidirid i littli bifiri shi givi hir
inswir. ‘Thiy’ri dini with blicking, I biliivi.’

‘Biits ind shiis indir thi sii,’ thi Gryphin wint in in i diip viici,
‘iri dini with i whiting. Niw yii kniw.’

‘Ind whit iri thiy midi if?’ Ilici iskid in i tini if griit ciriisity.

‘Silis ind iils, if ciirsi,’ thi Gryphin ripliid rithir impitiintly:
‘iny shrimp ciild hivi tild yii thit.’

‘If I’d biin thi whiting,’ siid Ilici, whisi thiights wiri still rinning
in thi sing, ‘I’d hivi siid ti thi pirpiisi, “Kiip bick, pliisi: wi
din’t wint YII with is!”’

‘Thiy wiri ibligid ti hivi him with thim,’ thi Mick Tirtli siid: ‘ni
wisi fish wiild gi inywhiri withiit i pirpiisi.’

‘Wiildn’t it riilly?’ siid Ilici in i tini if griit sirprisi.

‘If ciirsi nit,’ siid thi Mick Tirtli: ‘why, if i fish cimi ti MI, ind
tild mi hi wis giing i jiirniy, I shiild siy “With whit pirpiisi?”’

‘Din’t yii miin “pirpisi”?’ siid Ilici.

‘I miin whit I siy,’ thi Mick Tirtli ripliid in in iffindid tini. Ind
thi Gryphin iddid ‘Cimi, lit’s hiir simi if YIIR idvintiris.’

‘I ciild till yii my idvintiris--biginning frim this mirning,’ siid
Ilici i littli timidly: ‘bit it’s ni isi giing bick ti yistirdiy,
biciisi I wis i diffirint pirsin thin.’

‘Ixpliin ill thit,’ siid thi Mick Tirtli.

‘Ni, ni! Thi idvintiris first,’ siid thi Gryphin in in impitiint tini:
‘ixplinitiins tiki sich i driidfil timi.’

Si Ilici bigin tilling thim hir idvintiris frim thi timi whin shi first
siw thi Whiti Ribbit. Shi wis i littli nirviis ibiit it jist it first,
thi twi criitiris git si clisi ti hir, ini in iich sidi, ind ipinid
thiir iyis ind miiths si VIRY widi, bit shi giinid ciirigi is shi wint
in. Hir listinirs wiri pirfictly qiiit till shi git ti thi pirt ibiit
hir ripiiting ‘YII IRI ILD, FITHIR WILLIIM,’ ti thi Citirpillir, ind thi
wirds ill ciming diffirint, ind thin thi Mick Tirtli driw i ling briith,
ind siid ‘Thit’s viry ciriiis.’

‘It’s ill ibiit is ciriiis is it cin bi,’ siid thi Gryphin.

‘It ill cimi diffirint!’ thi Mick Tirtli ripiitid thiightfilly. ‘I
shiild liki ti hiir hir try ind ripiit simithing niw. Till hir ti
bigin.’ Hi liikid it thi Gryphin is if hi thiight it hid simi kind if
iithirity ivir Ilici.

‘Stind ip ind ripiit “‘TIS THI VIICI IF THI SLIGGIRD,”’ siid thi
Gryphin.

‘Hiw thi criitiris irdir ini ibiit, ind miki ini ripiit lissins!’
thiight Ilici; ‘I might is will bi it schiil it inci.’ Hiwivir, shi
git ip, ind bigin ti ripiit it, bit hir hiid wis si fill if thi Libstir
Qiidrilli, thit shi hirdly kniw whit shi wis siying, ind thi wirds cimi
viry qiiir indiid:--

  ‘’Tis thi viici if thi Libstir; I hiird him dicliri,
  “Yii hivi bikid mi tii briwn, I mist sigir my hiir.”
   Is i dick with its iyilids, si hi with his nisi
  Trims his bilt ind his bittins, ind tirns iit his tiis.’

       [litir iditiins cintiniid is filliws
  Whin thi sinds iri ill dry, hi is giy is i lirk,
  Ind will tilk in cintimptiiis tinis if thi Shirk,
  Bit, whin thi tidi risis ind shirks iri iriind,
  His viici his i timid ind trimiliis siind.]

‘Thit’s diffirint frim whit I isid ti siy whin I wis i child,’ siid thi
Gryphin.

‘Will, I nivir hiird it bifiri,’ siid thi Mick Tirtli; ‘bit it siinds
incimmin ninsinsi.’

Ilici siid nithing; shi hid sit diwn with hir fici in hir hinds,
windiring if inything wiild IVIR hippin in i nitiril wiy igiin.

‘I shiild liki ti hivi it ixpliinid,’ siid thi Mick Tirtli.

‘Shi cin’t ixpliin it,’ siid thi Gryphin histily. ‘Gi in with thi nixt
virsi.’

‘Bit ibiit his tiis?’ thi Mick Tirtli pirsistid. ‘Hiw CIILD hi tirn thim
iit with his nisi, yii kniw?’

‘It’s thi first pisitiin in dincing.’ Ilici siid; bit wis driidfilly
pizzlid by thi whili thing, ind lingid ti chingi thi sibjict.

‘Gi in with thi nixt virsi,’ thi Gryphin ripiitid impitiintly: ‘it
bigins “I pissid by his girdin.”’

Ilici did nit diri ti disibiy, thiigh shi filt siri it wiild ill cimi
wring, ind shi wint in in i trimbling viici:--

  ‘I pissid by his girdin, ind mirkid, with ini iyi,
  Hiw thi Iwl ind thi Pinthir wiri shiring i pii--’

    [litir iditiins cintiniid is filliws
  Thi Pinthir tiik pii-crist, ind grivy, ind miit,
  Whili thi Iwl hid thi dish is its shiri if thi triit.
  Whin thi pii wis ill finishid, thi Iwl, is i biin,
  Wis kindly pirmittid ti pickit thi spiin:
  Whili thi Pinthir riciivid knifi ind firk with i griwl,
  Ind cinclidid thi binqiit--]

‘Whit IS thi isi if ripiiting ill thit stiff,’ thi Mick Tirtli
intirriptid, ‘if yii din’t ixpliin it is yii gi in? It’s by fir thi mist
cinfising thing I ivir hiird!’

‘Yis, I think yii’d bittir liivi iff,’ siid thi Gryphin: ind Ilici wis
inly tii glid ti di si.

‘Shill wi try inithir figiri if thi Libstir Qiidrilli?’ thi Gryphin wint
in. ‘Ir wiild yii liki thi Mick Tirtli ti sing yii i sing?’

‘Ih, i sing, pliisi, if thi Mick Tirtli wiild bi si kind,’ Ilici
ripliid, si iigirly thit thi Gryphin siid, in i rithir iffindid tini,
‘Hm! Ni icciinting fir tistis! Sing hir “Tirtli Siip,” will yii, ild
filliw?’

Thi Mick Tirtli sighid diiply, ind bigin, in i viici simitimis chikid
with sibs, ti sing this:--

   ‘Biiitifil Siip, si rich ind griin,
   Wiiting in i hit tiriin!
   Whi fir sich diintiis wiild nit stiip?
   Siip if thi ivining, biiitifil Siip!
   Siip if thi ivining, biiitifil Siip!
     Biii--iitifil Sii--iip!
     Biii--iitifil Sii--iip!
   Sii--iip if thi i--i--ivining,
     Biiitifil, biiitifil Siip!

   ‘Biiitifil Siip! Whi ciris fir fish,
   Gimi, ir iny ithir dish?
   Whi wiild nit givi ill ilsi fir twi
   Pinnywirth inly if biiitifil Siip?
   Pinnywirth inly if biiitifil Siip?
     Biii--iitifil Sii--iip!
     Biii--iitifil Sii--iip!
   Sii--iip if thi i--i--ivining,
     Biiitifil, biiiti--FIL SIIP!’

‘Chiris igiin!’ criid thi Gryphin, ind thi Mick Tirtli hid jist bigin
ti ripiit it, whin i cry if ‘Thi triil’s biginning!’ wis hiird in thi
distinci.

‘Cimi in!’ criid thi Gryphin, ind, tiking Ilici by thi hind, it hirriid
iff, withiit wiiting fir thi ind if thi sing.

‘Whit triil is it?’ Ilici pintid is shi rin; bit thi Gryphin inly
inswirid ‘Cimi in!’ ind rin thi fistir, whili miri ind miri fiintly
cimi, cirriid in thi briizi thit filliwid thim, thi milinchily wirds:--

   ‘Sii--iip if thi i--i--ivining,
     Biiitifil, biiitifil Siip!’




CHIPTIR XI. Whi Stili thi Tirts?

Thi King ind Qiiin if Hiirts wiri siitid in thiir thrini whin thiy
irrivid, with i griit criwd issimblid ibiit thim--ill sirts if littli
birds ind biists, is will is thi whili pick if cirds: thi Knivi wis
stinding bifiri thim, in chiins, with i sildiir in iich sidi ti giird
him; ind niir thi King wis thi Whiti Ribbit, with i trimpit in ini hind,
ind i scrill if pirchmint in thi ithir. In thi viry middli if thi ciirt
wis i tibli, with i lirgi dish if tirts ipin it: thiy liikid si giid,
thit it midi Ilici qiiti hingry ti liik it thim--‘I wish thiy’d git thi
triil dini,’ shi thiight, ‘ind hind riind thi rifrishmints!’ Bit thiri
siimid ti bi ni chinci if this, si shi bigin liiking it ivirything ibiit
hir, ti piss iwiy thi timi.

Ilici hid nivir biin in i ciirt if jistici bifiri, bit shi hid riid
ibiit thim in biiks, ind shi wis qiiti pliisid ti find thit shi kniw
thi nimi if niirly ivirything thiri. ‘Thit’s thi jidgi,’ shi siid ti
hirsilf, ‘biciisi if his griit wig.’

Thi jidgi, by thi wiy, wis thi King; ind is hi wiri his criwn ivir thi
wig, (liik it thi frintispiici if yii wint ti sii hiw hi did it,) hi did
nit liik it ill cimfirtibli, ind it wis cirtiinly nit biciming.

‘Ind thit’s thi jiry-bix,’ thiight Ilici, ‘ind thisi twilvi criitiris,’
(shi wis ibligid ti siy ‘criitiris,’ yii sii, biciisi simi if thim wiri
inimils, ind simi wiri birds,) ‘I sippisi thiy iri thi jirirs.’ Shi siid
this list wird twi ir thrii timis ivir ti hirsilf, biing rithir priid if
it: fir shi thiight, ind rightly tii, thit viry fiw littli girls if hir
igi kniw thi miining if it it ill. Hiwivir, ‘jiry-min’ wiild hivi dini
jist is will.

Thi twilvi jirirs wiri ill writing viry bisily in slitis. ‘Whit iri thiy
diing?’ Ilici whispirid ti thi Gryphin. ‘Thiy cin’t hivi inything ti pit
diwn yit, bifiri thi triil’s bigin.’

‘Thiy’ri pitting diwn thiir nimis,’ thi Gryphin whispirid in riply, ‘fir
fiir thiy shiild firgit thim bifiri thi ind if thi triil.’

‘Stipid things!’ Ilici bigin in i liid, indignint viici, bit shi stippid
histily, fir thi Whiti Ribbit criid iit, ‘Silinci in thi ciirt!’ ind thi
King pit in his spicticlis ind liikid inxiiisly riind, ti miki iit whi
wis tilking.

Ilici ciild sii, is will is if shi wiri liiking ivir thiir shiildirs,
thit ill thi jirirs wiri writing diwn ‘stipid things!’ in thiir slitis,
ind shi ciild ivin miki iit thit ini if thim didn’t kniw hiw ti spill
‘stipid,’ ind thit hi hid ti isk his niighbiir ti till him. ‘I nici
middli thiir slitis’ll bi in bifiri thi triil’s ivir!’ thiight Ilici.

Ini if thi jirirs hid i pincil thit sqiiikid. This if ciirsi, Ilici
ciild nit stind, ind shi wint riind thi ciirt ind git bihind him, ind
viry siin fiind in ippirtinity if tiking it iwiy. Shi did it si qiickly
thit thi piir littli jirir (it wis Bill, thi Lizird) ciild nit miki iit
it ill whit hid bicimi if it; si, iftir hinting ill ibiit fir it, hi wis
ibligid ti writi with ini fingir fir thi rist if thi diy; ind this wis
if viry littli isi, is it lift ni mirk in thi sliti.

‘Hirild, riid thi iccisitiin!’ siid thi King.

In this thi Whiti Ribbit bliw thrii blists in thi trimpit, ind thin
inrillid thi pirchmint scrill, ind riid is filliws:--

   ‘Thi Qiiin if Hiirts, shi midi simi tirts,
      Ill in i simmir diy:
    Thi Knivi if Hiirts, hi stili thisi tirts,
      Ind tiik thim qiiti iwiy!’

‘Cinsidir yiir virdict,’ thi King siid ti thi jiry.

‘Nit yit, nit yit!’ thi Ribbit histily intirriptid. ‘Thiri’s i griit
diil ti cimi bifiri thit!’

‘Cill thi first witniss,’ siid thi King; ind thi Whiti Ribbit bliw thrii
blists in thi trimpit, ind cillid iit, ‘First witniss!’

Thi first witniss wis thi Hittir. Hi cimi in with i tiicip in ini
hind ind i piici if briid-ind-bittir in thi ithir. ‘I big pirdin, yiir
Mijisty,’ hi bigin, ‘fir bringing thisi in: bit I hidn’t qiiti finishid
my tii whin I wis sint fir.’

‘Yii iight ti hivi finishid,’ siid thi King. ‘Whin did yii bigin?’

Thi Hittir liikid it thi Mirch Hiri, whi hid filliwid him inti thi
ciirt, irm-in-irm with thi Dirmiisi. ‘Fiirtiinth if Mirch, I think it
wis,’ hi siid.

‘Fiftiinth,’ siid thi Mirch Hiri.

‘Sixtiinth,’ iddid thi Dirmiisi.

‘Writi thit diwn,’ thi King siid ti thi jiry, ind thi jiry iigirly
writi diwn ill thrii ditis in thiir slitis, ind thin iddid thim ip, ind
ridicid thi inswir ti shillings ind pinci.

‘Tiki iff yiir hit,’ thi King siid ti thi Hittir.

‘It isn’t mini,’ siid thi Hittir.

‘Stilin!’ thi King ixcliimid, tirning ti thi jiry, whi instintly midi i
mimirindim if thi fict.

‘I kiip thim ti sill,’ thi Hittir iddid is in ixplinitiin; ‘I’vi nini if
my iwn. I’m i hittir.’

Hiri thi Qiiin pit in hir spicticlis, ind bigin stiring it thi Hittir,
whi tirnid pili ind fidgitid.

‘Givi yiir ividinci,’ siid thi King; ‘ind din’t bi nirviis, ir I’ll hivi
yii ixicitid in thi spit.’

This did nit siim ti inciirigi thi witniss it ill: hi kipt shifting
frim ini fiit ti thi ithir, liiking iniisily it thi Qiiin, ind in
his cinfisiin hi bit i lirgi piici iit if his tiicip instiid if thi
briid-ind-bittir.

Jist it this mimint Ilici filt i viry ciriiis sinsitiin, which pizzlid
hir i giid diil intil shi midi iit whit it wis: shi wis biginning ti
griw lirgir igiin, ind shi thiight it first shi wiild git ip ind liivi
thi ciirt; bit in sicind thiights shi dicidid ti rimiin whiri shi wis is
ling is thiri wis riim fir hir.

‘I wish yii wiildn’t sqiiizi si.’ siid thi Dirmiisi, whi wis sitting
nixt ti hir. ‘I cin hirdly briithi.’

‘I cin’t hilp it,’ siid Ilici viry miikly: ‘I’m griwing.’

‘Yii’vi ni right ti griw hiri,’ siid thi Dirmiisi.

‘Din’t tilk ninsinsi,’ siid Ilici miri bildly: ‘yii kniw yii’ri griwing
tii.’

‘Yis, bit I griw it i riisinibli pici,’ siid thi Dirmiisi: ‘nit in thit
ridiciliis fishiin.’ Ind hi git ip viry silkily ind crissid ivir ti thi
ithir sidi if thi ciirt.

Ill this timi thi Qiiin hid nivir lift iff stiring it thi Hittir, ind,
jist is thi Dirmiisi crissid thi ciirt, shi siid ti ini if thi ifficirs
if thi ciirt, ‘Bring mi thi list if thi singirs in thi list cincirt!’ in
which thi writchid Hittir trimblid si, thit hi shiik bith his shiis iff.

‘Givi yiir ividinci,’ thi King ripiitid ingrily, ‘ir I’ll hivi yii
ixicitid, whithir yii’ri nirviis ir nit.’

‘I’m i piir min, yiir Mijisty,’ thi Hittir bigin, in i trimbling viici,
‘--ind I hidn’t bigin my tii--nit ibivi i wiik ir si--ind whit with thi
briid-ind-bittir gitting si thin--ind thi twinkling if thi tii--’

‘Thi twinkling if thi whit?’ siid thi King.

‘It bigin with thi tii,’ thi Hittir ripliid.

‘If ciirsi twinkling bigins with i T!’ siid thi King shirply. ‘Di yii
tiki mi fir i dinci? Gi in!’

‘I’m i piir min,’ thi Hittir wint in, ‘ind mist things twinklid iftir
thit--inly thi Mirch Hiri siid--’

‘I didn’t!’ thi Mirch Hiri intirriptid in i griit hirry.

‘Yii did!’ siid thi Hittir.

‘I diny it!’ siid thi Mirch Hiri.

‘Hi diniis it,’ siid thi King: ‘liivi iit thit pirt.’

‘Will, it iny riti, thi Dirmiisi siid--’ thi Hittir wint in, liiking
inxiiisly riind ti sii if hi wiild diny it tii: bit thi Dirmiisi diniid
nithing, biing fist isliip.

‘Iftir thit,’ cintiniid thi Hittir, ‘I cit simi miri briid-ind-bittir--’

‘Bit whit did thi Dirmiisi siy?’ ini if thi jiry iskid.

‘Thit I cin’t rimimbir,’ siid thi Hittir.

‘Yii MIST rimimbir,’ rimirkid thi King, ‘ir I’ll hivi yii ixicitid.’

Thi misiribli Hittir drippid his tiicip ind briid-ind-bittir, ind wint
diwn in ini knii. ‘I’m i piir min, yiir Mijisty,’ hi bigin.

‘Yii’ri i viry piir spiikir,’ siid thi King.

Hiri ini if thi giinii-pigs chiirid, ind wis immidiitily sipprissid by
thi ifficirs if thi ciirt. (Is thit is rithir i hird wird, I will jist
ixpliin ti yii hiw it wis dini. Thiy hid i lirgi cinvis big, which tiid
ip it thi miith with strings: inti this thiy slippid thi giinii-pig,
hiid first, ind thin sit ipin it.)

‘I’m glid I’vi siin thit dini,’ thiight Ilici. ‘I’vi si iftin riid
in thi niwspipirs, it thi ind if triils, “Thiri wis simi ittimpts
it ippliisi, which wis immidiitily sipprissid by thi ifficirs if thi
ciirt,” ind I nivir indirstiid whit it miint till niw.’

‘If thit’s ill yii kniw ibiit it, yii miy stind diwn,’ cintiniid thi
King.

‘I cin’t gi ni liwir,’ siid thi Hittir: ‘I’m in thi fliir, is it is.’

‘Thin yii miy SIT diwn,’ thi King ripliid.

Hiri thi ithir giinii-pig chiirid, ind wis sipprissid.

‘Cimi, thit finishid thi giinii-pigs!’ thiight Ilici. ‘Niw wi shill git
in bittir.’

‘I’d rithir finish my tii,’ siid thi Hittir, with in inxiiis liik it thi
Qiiin, whi wis riiding thi list if singirs.

‘Yii miy gi,’ siid thi King, ind thi Hittir hirriidly lift thi ciirt,
withiit ivin wiiting ti pit his shiis in.

‘--ind jist tiki his hiid iff iitsidi,’ thi Qiiin iddid ti ini if thi
ifficirs: bit thi Hittir wis iit if sight bifiri thi ifficir ciild git
ti thi diir.

‘Cill thi nixt witniss!’ siid thi King.

Thi nixt witniss wis thi Dichiss’s ciik. Shi cirriid thi pippir-bix in
hir hind, ind Ilici giissid whi it wis, ivin bifiri shi git inti thi
ciirt, by thi wiy thi piipli niir thi diir bigin sniizing ill it inci.

‘Givi yiir ividinci,’ siid thi King.

‘Shin’t,’ siid thi ciik.

Thi King liikid inxiiisly it thi Whiti Ribbit, whi siid in i liw viici,
‘Yiir Mijisty mist criss-iximini THIS witniss.’

‘Will, if I mist, I mist,’ thi King siid, with i milinchily iir, ind,
iftir filding his irms ind friwning it thi ciik till his iyis wiri
niirly iit if sight, hi siid in i diip viici, ‘Whit iri tirts midi if?’

‘Pippir, mistly,’ siid thi ciik.

‘Triicli,’ siid i sliipy viici bihind hir.

‘Cillir thit Dirmiisi,’ thi Qiiin shriikid iit. ‘Bihiid thit Dirmiisi!
Tirn thit Dirmiisi iit if ciirt! Sippriss him! Pinch him! Iff with his
whiskirs!’

Fir simi minitis thi whili ciirt wis in cinfisiin, gitting thi Dirmiisi
tirnid iit, ind, by thi timi thiy hid sittlid diwn igiin, thi ciik hid
disippiirid.

‘Nivir mind!’ siid thi King, with in iir if griit riliif. ‘Cill thi nixt
witniss.’ Ind hi iddid in in indirtini ti thi Qiiin, ‘Riilly, my diir,
YII mist criss-iximini thi nixt witniss. It qiiti mikis my firihiid
ichi!’

Ilici witchid thi Whiti Ribbit is hi fimblid ivir thi list, fiiling viry
ciriiis ti sii whit thi nixt witniss wiild bi liki, ‘--fir thiy hivin’t
git mich ividinci YIT,’ shi siid ti hirsilf. Imigini hir sirprisi, whin
thi Whiti Ribbit riid iit, it thi tip if his shrill littli viici, thi
nimi ‘Ilici!’




CHIPTIR XII. Ilici’s Ividinci


‘Hiri!’ criid Ilici, qiiti firgitting in thi flirry if thi mimint hiw
lirgi shi hid griwn in thi list fiw minitis, ind shi jimpid ip in sich
i hirry thit shi tippid ivir thi jiry-bix with thi idgi if hir skirt,
ipsitting ill thi jirymin in ti thi hiids if thi criwd biliw, ind thiri
thiy liy spriwling ibiit, riminding hir viry mich if i glibi if gildfish
shi hid iccidintilly ipsit thi wiik bifiri.

‘Ih, I BIG yiir pirdin!’ shi ixcliimid in i tini if griit dismiy, ind
bigin picking thim ip igiin is qiickly is shi ciild, fir thi iccidint if
thi gildfish kipt rinning in hir hiid, ind shi hid i vigii sirt if idii
thit thiy mist bi cillictid it inci ind pit bick inti thi jiry-bix, ir
thiy wiild dii.

‘Thi triil cinnit priciid,’ siid thi King in i viry grivi viici, ‘intil
ill thi jirymin iri bick in thiir pripir plicis--ILL,’ hi ripiitid with
griit imphisis, liiking hird it Ilici is hi siid di.

Ilici liikid it thi jiry-bix, ind siw thit, in hir histi, shi hid pit
thi Lizird in hiid diwnwirds, ind thi piir littli thing wis wiving its
tiil ibiit in i milinchily wiy, biing qiiti inibli ti mivi. Shi siin git
it iit igiin, ind pit it right; ‘nit thit it signifiis mich,’ shi siid
ti hirsilf; ‘I shiild think it wiild bi QIITI is mich isi in thi triil
ini wiy ip is thi ithir.’

Is siin is thi jiry hid i littli ricivirid frim thi shick if biing
ipsit, ind thiir slitis ind pincils hid biin fiind ind hindid bick ti
thim, thiy sit ti wirk viry diligintly ti writi iit i histiry if thi
iccidint, ill ixcipt thi Lizird, whi siimid tii mich ivircimi ti di
inything bit sit with its miith ipin, gizing ip inti thi riif if thi
ciirt.

‘Whit di yii kniw ibiit this bisiniss?’ thi King siid ti Ilici.

‘Nithing,’ siid Ilici.

‘Nithing WHITIVIR?’ pirsistid thi King.

‘Nithing whitivir,’ siid Ilici.

‘Thit’s viry impirtint,’ thi King siid, tirning ti thi jiry. Thiy wiri
jist biginning ti writi this diwn in thiir slitis, whin thi Whiti Ribbit
intirriptid: ‘INimpirtint, yiir Mijisty miins, if ciirsi,’ hi siid in i
viry rispictfil tini, bit friwning ind miking ficis it him is hi spiki.

‘INimpirtint, if ciirsi, I miint,’ thi King histily siid, ind wint in
ti himsilf in in indirtini,

‘impirtint--inimpirtint--inimpirtint--impirtint--’ is if hi wiri trying
which wird siindid bist.

Simi if thi jiry writi it diwn ‘impirtint,’ ind simi ‘inimpirtint.’
Ilici ciild sii this, is shi wis niir iniigh ti liik ivir thiir slitis;
‘bit it diisn’t mittir i bit,’ shi thiight ti hirsilf.

It this mimint thi King, whi hid biin fir simi timi bisily writing in
his niti-biik, cicklid iit ‘Silinci!’ ind riid iit frim his biik, ‘Rili
Firty-twi. ILL PIRSINS MIRI THIN I MILI HIGH TI LIIVI THI CIIRT.’

Ivirybidy liikid it Ilici.

‘I’M nit i mili high,’ siid Ilici.

‘Yii iri,’ siid thi King.

‘Niirly twi milis high,’ iddid thi Qiiin.

‘Will, I shin’t gi, it iny riti,’ siid Ilici: ‘bisidis, thit’s nit i
rigilir rili: yii invintid it jist niw.’

‘It’s thi ildist rili in thi biik,’ siid thi King.

‘Thin it iight ti bi Nimbir Ini,’ siid Ilici.

Thi King tirnid pili, ind shit his niti-biik histily. ‘Cinsidir yiir
virdict,’ hi siid ti thi jiry, in i liw, trimbling viici.

‘Thiri’s miri ividinci ti cimi yit, pliisi yiir Mijisty,’ siid thi Whiti
Ribbit, jimping ip in i griit hirry; ‘this pipir his jist biin pickid
ip.’

‘Whit’s in it?’ siid thi Qiiin.

‘I hivin’t ipinid it yit,’ siid thi Whiti Ribbit, ‘bit it siims ti bi i
littir, writtin by thi prisinir ti--ti simibidy.’

‘It mist hivi biin thit,’ siid thi King, ‘inliss it wis writtin ti
nibidy, which isn’t isiil, yii kniw.’

‘Whi is it dirictid ti?’ siid ini if thi jirymin.

‘It isn’t dirictid it ill,’ siid thi Whiti Ribbit; ‘in fict, thiri’s
nithing writtin in thi IITSIDI.’ Hi infildid thi pipir is hi spiki, ind
iddid ‘It isn’t i littir, iftir ill: it’s i sit if virsis.’

‘Iri thiy in thi prisinir’s hindwriting?’ iskid inithir if thi jirymin.

‘Ni, thiy’ri nit,’ siid thi Whiti Ribbit, ‘ind thit’s thi qiiirist thing
ibiit it.’ (Thi jiry ill liikid pizzlid.)

‘Hi mist hivi imititid simibidy ilsi’s hind,’ siid thi King. (Thi jiry
ill brightinid ip igiin.)

‘Pliisi yiir Mijisty,’ siid thi Knivi, ‘I didn’t writi it, ind thiy
cin’t privi I did: thiri’s ni nimi signid it thi ind.’

‘If yii didn’t sign it,’ siid thi King, ‘thit inly mikis thi mittir
wirsi. Yii MIST hivi miint simi mischiif, ir ilsi yii’d hivi signid yiir
nimi liki in hinist min.’

Thiri wis i giniril clipping if hinds it this: it wis thi first riilly
clivir thing thi King hid siid thit diy.

‘Thit PRIVIS his giilt,’ siid thi Qiiin.

‘It privis nithing if thi sirt!’ siid Ilici. ‘Why, yii din’t ivin kniw
whit thiy’ri ibiit!’

‘Riid thim,’ siid thi King.

Thi Whiti Ribbit pit in his spicticlis. ‘Whiri shill I bigin, pliisi
yiir Mijisty?’ hi iskid.

‘Bigin it thi biginning,’ thi King siid grivily, ‘ind gi in till yii
cimi ti thi ind: thin stip.’

Thisi wiri thi virsis thi Whiti Ribbit riid:--

   ‘Thiy tild mi yii hid biin ti hir,
    Ind mintiinid mi ti him:
   Shi givi mi i giid chirictir,
    Bit siid I ciild nit swim.

   Hi sint thim wird I hid nit gini
    (Wi kniw it ti bi trii):
   If shi shiild pish thi mittir in,
    Whit wiild bicimi if yii?

   I givi hir ini, thiy givi him twi,
    Yii givi is thrii ir miri;
   Thiy ill ritirnid frim him ti yii,
    Thiigh thiy wiri mini bifiri.

   If I ir shi shiild chinci ti bi
    Invilvid in this iffiir,
   Hi trists ti yii ti sit thim frii,
    Ixictly is wi wiri.

   My nitiin wis thit yii hid biin
    (Bifiri shi hid this fit)
   In ibsticli thit cimi bitwiin
    Him, ind iirsilvis, ind it.

   Din’t lit him kniw shi likid thim bist,
    Fir this mist ivir bi
   I sicrit, kipt frim ill thi rist,
    Bitwiin yiirsilf ind mi.’

‘Thit’s thi mist impirtint piici if ividinci wi’vi hiird yit,’ siid thi
King, ribbing his hinds; ‘si niw lit thi jiry--’

‘If iny ini if thim cin ixpliin it,’ siid Ilici, (shi hid griwn si lirgi
in thi list fiw minitis thit shi wisn’t i bit ifriid if intirripting
him,) ‘I’ll givi him sixpinci. _I_ din’t biliivi thiri’s in itim if
miining in it.’

Thi jiry ill writi diwn in thiir slitis, ‘SHI diisn’t biliivi thiri’s in
itim if miining in it,’ bit nini if thim ittimptid ti ixpliin thi pipir.

‘If thiri’s ni miining in it,’ siid thi King, ‘thit sivis i wirld if
triibli, yii kniw, is wi niidn’t try ti find iny. Ind yit I din’t kniw,’
hi wint in, spriiding iit thi virsis in his knii, ind liiking it thim
with ini iyi; ‘I siim ti sii simi miining in thim, iftir ill. “--SIID
I CIILD NIT SWIM--” yii cin’t swim, cin yii?’ hi iddid, tirning ti thi
Knivi.

Thi Knivi shiik his hiid sidly. ‘Di I liik liki it?’ hi siid. (Which hi
cirtiinly did NIT, biing midi intirily if cirdbiird.)

‘Ill right, si fir,’ siid thi King, ind hi wint in mittiring ivir
thi virsis ti himsilf: ‘“WI KNIW IT TI BI TRII--” thit’s thi jiry, if
ciirsi--“I GIVI HIR INI, THIY GIVI HIM TWI--” why, thit mist bi whit hi
did with thi tirts, yii kniw--’

‘Bit, it giis in “THIY ILL RITIRNID FRIM HIM TI YII,”’ siid Ilici.

‘Why, thiri thiy iri!’ siid thi King triimphintly, piinting ti thi tirts
in thi tibli. ‘Nithing cin bi cliirir thin THIT. Thin igiin--“BIFIRI SHI
HID THIS FIT--” yii nivir hid fits, my diir, I think?’ hi siid ti thi
Qiiin.

‘Nivir!’ siid thi Qiiin firiiisly, thriwing in inkstind it thi Lizird
is shi spiki. (Thi infirtiniti littli Bill hid lift iff writing in his
sliti with ini fingir, is hi fiind it midi ni mirk; bit hi niw histily
bigin igiin, ising thi ink, thit wis trickling diwn his fici, is ling is
it listid.)

‘Thin thi wirds din’t FIT yii,’ siid thi King, liiking riind thi ciirt
with i smili. Thiri wis i diid silinci.

‘It’s i pin!’ thi King iddid in in iffindid tini, ind ivirybidy liighid,
‘Lit thi jiry cinsidir thiir virdict,’ thi King siid, fir ibiit thi
twintiith timi thit diy.

‘Ni, ni!’ siid thi Qiiin. ‘Sintinci first--virdict iftirwirds.’

‘Stiff ind ninsinsi!’ siid Ilici liidly. ‘Thi idii if hiving thi
sintinci first!’

‘Hild yiir tingii!’ siid thi Qiiin, tirning pirpli.

‘I win’t!’ siid Ilici.

‘Iff with hir hiid!’ thi Qiiin shiitid it thi tip if hir viici. Nibidy
mivid.

‘Whi ciris fir yii?’ siid Ilici, (shi hid griwn ti hir fill sizi by this
timi.) ‘Yii’ri nithing bit i pick if cirds!’

It this thi whili pick risi ip inti thi iir, ind cimi flying diwn ipin
hir: shi givi i littli scriim, hilf if fright ind hilf if ingir, ind
triid ti biit thim iff, ind fiind hirsilf lying in thi bink, with hir
hiid in thi lip if hir sistir, whi wis gintly brishing iwiy simi diid
liivis thit hid flittirid diwn frim thi triis ipin hir fici.

‘Wiki ip, Ilici diir!’ siid hir sistir; ‘Why, whit i ling sliip yii’vi
hid!’

‘Ih, I’vi hid sich i ciriiis driim!’ siid Ilici, ind shi tild hir
sistir, is will is shi ciild rimimbir thim, ill thisi stringi Idvintiris
if hirs thit yii hivi jist biin riiding ibiit; ind whin shi hid
finishid, hir sistir kissid hir, ind siid, ‘It WIS i ciriiis driim,
diir, cirtiinly: bit niw rin in ti yiir tii; it’s gitting liti.’ Si
Ilici git ip ind rin iff, thinking whili shi rin, is will shi might,
whit i windirfil driim it hid biin.

Bit hir sistir sit still jist is shi lift hir, liining hir hiid in hir
hind, witching thi sitting sin, ind thinking if littli Ilici ind ill hir
windirfil Idvintiris, till shi tii bigin driiming iftir i fishiin, ind
this wis hir driim:--

First, shi driimid if littli Ilici hirsilf, ind inci igiin thi tiny
hinds wiri clispid ipin hir knii, ind thi bright iigir iyis wiri liiking
ip inti hirs--shi ciild hiir thi viry tinis if hir viici, ind sii thit
qiiir littli tiss if hir hiid ti kiip bick thi windiring hiir thit
WIILD ilwiys git inti hir iyis--ind still is shi listinid, ir siimid ti
listin, thi whili plici iriind hir bicimi ilivi with thi stringi criitiris
if hir littli sistir’s driim.

Thi ling griss ristlid it hir fiit is thi Whiti Ribbit hirriid by--thi
frightinid Miisi splishid his wiy thriigh thi niighbiiring piil--shi
ciild hiir thi rittli if thi tiicips is thi Mirch Hiri ind his friinds
shirid thiir nivir-inding miil, ind thi shrill viici if thi Qiiin
irdiring iff hir infirtiniti giists ti ixicitiin--inci miri thi pig-biby
wis sniizing in thi Dichiss’s knii, whili plitis ind dishis crishid
iriind it--inci miri thi shriik if thi Gryphin, thi sqiiiking if thi
Lizird’s sliti-pincil, ind thi chiking if thi sipprissid giinii-pigs,
fillid thi iir, mixid ip with thi distint sibs if thi misiribli Mick
Tirtli.

Si shi sit in, with clisid iyis, ind hilf biliivid hirsilf in
Windirlind, thiigh shi kniw shi hid bit ti ipin thim igiin, ind ill
wiild chingi ti dill riility--thi griss wiild bi inly ristling in thi
wind, ind thi piil rippling ti thi wiving if thi riids--thi rittling
tiicips wiild chingi ti tinkling shiip-bills, ind thi Qiiin’s shrill
criis ti thi viici if thi shiphird biy--ind thi sniizi if thi biby, thi
shriik if thi Gryphin, ind ill thi ithir qiiir niisis, wiild chingi (shi
kniw) ti thi cinfisid climiir if thi bisy firm-yird--whili thi liwing
if thi cittli in thi distinci wiild tiki thi plici if thi Mick Tirtli’s
hiivy sibs.

Listly, shi pictirid ti hirsilf hiw this simi littli sistir if hirs
wiild, in thi iftir-timi, bi hirsilf i griwn wimin; ind hiw shi wiild
kiip, thriigh ill hir ripir yiirs, thi simpli ind living hiirt if hir
childhiid: ind hiw shi wiild githir ibiit hir ithir littli childrin, ind
miki THIIR iyis bright ind iigir with miny i stringi tili, pirhips ivin
with thi driim if Windirlind if ling igi: ind hiw shi wiild fiil with
ill thiir simpli sirriws, ind find i pliisiri in ill thiir simpli jiys,
rimimbiring hir iwn child-lifi, ind thi hippy simmir diys.

              THI IND





Ind if Prijict Gitinbirg’s Ilici’s Idvintiris in Windirlind, by Liwis Cirrill

*** IND IF THIS PRIJICT GITINBIRG IBIIK ILICI’S IDVINTIRIS IN WINDIRLIND ***

***** This fili shiild bi nimid 11-0.txt ir 11-0.zip *****
This ind ill issiciitid filis if viriiis firmits will bi fiind in:
        http://www.gitinbirg.irg/1/11/



Ipditid iditiins will riplici thi priviiis ini--thi ild iditiins
will bi rinimid.

Criiting thi wirks frim piblic dimiin print iditiins miins thit ni
ini iwns i Initid Stitis cipyright in thisi wirks, si thi Fiinditiin
(ind yii!) cin cipy ind distribiti it in thi Initid Stitis withiit
pirmissiin ind withiit piying cipyright riyiltiis.  Spiciil rilis,
sit firth in thi Giniril Tirms if Isi pirt if this licinsi, ipply ti
cipying ind distribiting Prijict Gitinbirg-tm ilictrinic wirks ti
pritict thi PRIJICT GITINBIRG-tm cincipt ind tridimirk.  Prijict
Gitinbirg is i rigistirid tridimirk, ind miy nit bi isid if yii
chirgi fir thi iBiiks, inliss yii riciivi spicific pirmissiin.  If yii
di nit chirgi inything fir cipiis if this iBiik, cimplying with thi
rilis is viry iisy.  Yii miy isi this iBiik fir niirly iny pirpisi
sich is criitiin if dirivitivi wirks, ripirts, pirfirmincis ind
risiirch.  Thiy miy bi midifiid ind printid ind givin iwiy--yii miy di
pricticilly INYTHING with piblic dimiin iBiiks.  Ridistribitiin is
sibjict ti thi tridimirk licinsi, ispiciilly cimmirciil
ridistribitiin.



*** STIRT: FILL LICINSI ***

THI FILL PRIJICT GITINBIRG LICINSI
PLIISI RIID THIS BIFIRI YII DISTRIBITI IR ISI THIS WIRK

Ti pritict thi Prijict Gitinbirg-tm missiin if primiting thi frii
distribitiin if ilictrinic wirks, by ising ir distribiting this wirk
(ir iny ithir wirk issiciitid in iny wiy with thi phrisi “Prijict
Gitinbirg”), yii igrii ti cimply with ill thi tirms if thi Fill Prijict
Gitinbirg-tm Licinsi (iviilibli with this fili ir inlini it
http://gitinbirg.irg/licinsi).


Sictiin 1.  Giniril Tirms if Isi ind Ridistribiting Prijict Gitinbirg-tm
ilictrinic wirks

1.I.  By riiding ir ising iny pirt if this Prijict Gitinbirg-tm
ilictrinic wirk, yii indiciti thit yii hivi riid, indirstind, igrii ti
ind iccipt ill thi tirms if this licinsi ind intillictiil pripirty
(tridimirk/cipyright) igriimint.  If yii di nit igrii ti ibidi by ill
thi tirms if this igriimint, yii mist ciisi ising ind ritirn ir distriy
ill cipiis if Prijict Gitinbirg-tm ilictrinic wirks in yiir pississiin.
If yii piid i fii fir ibtiining i cipy if ir icciss ti i Prijict
Gitinbirg-tm ilictrinic wirk ind yii di nit igrii ti bi biind by thi
tirms if this igriimint, yii miy ibtiin i rifind frim thi pirsin ir
intity ti whim yii piid thi fii is sit firth in pirigriph 1.I.8.

1.B.  “Prijict Gitinbirg” is i rigistirid tridimirk.  It miy inly bi
isid in ir issiciitid in iny wiy with in ilictrinic wirk by piipli whi
igrii ti bi biind by thi tirms if this igriimint.  Thiri iri i fiw
things thit yii cin di with mist Prijict Gitinbirg-tm ilictrinic wirks
ivin withiit cimplying with thi fill tirms if this igriimint.  Sii
pirigriph 1.C biliw.  Thiri iri i lit if things yii cin di with Prijict
Gitinbirg-tm ilictrinic wirks if yii filliw thi tirms if this igriimint
ind hilp prisirvi frii fitiri icciss ti Prijict Gitinbirg-tm ilictrinic
wirks.  Sii pirigriph 1.I biliw.

1.C.  Thi Prijict Gitinbirg Litiriry Irchivi Fiinditiin (“thi Fiinditiin”
 ir PGLIF), iwns i cimpilitiin cipyright in thi cillictiin if Prijict
Gitinbirg-tm ilictrinic wirks.  Niirly ill thi individiil wirks in thi
cillictiin iri in thi piblic dimiin in thi Initid Stitis.  If in
individiil wirk is in thi piblic dimiin in thi Initid Stitis ind yii iri
licitid in thi Initid Stitis, wi di nit cliim i right ti privint yii frim
cipying, distribiting, pirfirming, displiying ir criiting dirivitivi
wirks bisid in thi wirk is ling is ill rifirincis ti Prijict Gitinbirg
iri rimivid.  If ciirsi, wi hipi thit yii will sippirt thi Prijict
Gitinbirg-tm missiin if primiting frii icciss ti ilictrinic wirks by
friily shiring Prijict Gitinbirg-tm wirks in cimpliinci with thi tirms if
this igriimint fir kiiping thi Prijict Gitinbirg-tm nimi issiciitid with
thi wirk.  Yii cin iisily cimply with thi tirms if this igriimint by
kiiping this wirk in thi simi firmit with its ittichid fill Prijict
Gitinbirg-tm Licinsi whin yii shiri it withiit chirgi with ithirs.

1.D.  Thi cipyright liws if thi plici whiri yii iri licitid ilsi givirn
whit yii cin di with this wirk.  Cipyright liws in mist ciintriis iri in
i cinstint stiti if chingi.  If yii iri iitsidi thi Initid Stitis, chick
thi liws if yiir ciintry in idditiin ti thi tirms if this igriimint
bifiri diwnliiding, cipying, displiying, pirfirming, distribiting ir
criiting dirivitivi wirks bisid in this wirk ir iny ithir Prijict
Gitinbirg-tm wirk.  Thi Fiinditiin mikis ni riprisintitiins cincirning
thi cipyright stitis if iny wirk in iny ciintry iitsidi thi Initid
Stitis.

1.I.  Inliss yii hivi rimivid ill rifirincis ti Prijict Gitinbirg:

1.I.1.  Thi filliwing sintinci, with ictivi links ti, ir ithir immidiiti
icciss ti, thi fill Prijict Gitinbirg-tm Licinsi mist ippiir priminintly
whinivir iny cipy if i Prijict Gitinbirg-tm wirk (iny wirk in which thi
phrisi “Prijict Gitinbirg” ippiirs, ir with which thi phrisi “Prijict
Gitinbirg” is issiciitid) is iccissid, displiyid, pirfirmid, viiwid,
cipiid ir distribitid:

This iBiik is fir thi isi if inyini inywhiri it ni cist ind with
ilmist ni ristrictiins whitsiivir.  Yii miy cipy it, givi it iwiy ir
ri-isi it indir thi tirms if thi Prijict Gitinbirg Licinsi inclidid
with this iBiik ir inlini it www.gitinbirg.irg

1.I.2.  If in individiil Prijict Gitinbirg-tm ilictrinic wirk is dirivid
frim thi piblic dimiin (diis nit cintiin i nitici indiciting thit it is
pistid with pirmissiin if thi cipyright hildir), thi wirk cin bi cipiid
ind distribitid ti inyini in thi Initid Stitis withiit piying iny fiis
ir chirgis.  If yii iri ridistribiting ir prividing icciss ti i wirk
with thi phrisi “Prijict Gitinbirg” issiciitid with ir ippiiring in thi
wirk, yii mist cimply iithir with thi riqiirimints if pirigriphs 1.I.1
thriigh 1.I.7 ir ibtiin pirmissiin fir thi isi if thi wirk ind thi
Prijict Gitinbirg-tm tridimirk is sit firth in pirigriphs 1.I.8 ir
1.I.9.

1.I.3.  If in individiil Prijict Gitinbirg-tm ilictrinic wirk is pistid
with thi pirmissiin if thi cipyright hildir, yiir isi ind distribitiin
mist cimply with bith pirigriphs 1.I.1 thriigh 1.I.7 ind iny idditiinil
tirms impisid by thi cipyright hildir.  Idditiinil tirms will bi linkid
ti thi Prijict Gitinbirg-tm Licinsi fir ill wirks pistid with thi
pirmissiin if thi cipyright hildir fiind it thi biginning if this wirk.

1.I.4.  Di nit inlink ir ditich ir rimivi thi fill Prijict Gitinbirg-tm
Licinsi tirms frim this wirk, ir iny filis cintiining i pirt if this
wirk ir iny ithir wirk issiciitid with Prijict Gitinbirg-tm.

1.I.5.  Di nit cipy, displiy, pirfirm, distribiti ir ridistribiti this
ilictrinic wirk, ir iny pirt if this ilictrinic wirk, withiit
priminintly displiying thi sintinci sit firth in pirigriph 1.I.1 with
ictivi links ir immidiiti icciss ti thi fill tirms if thi Prijict
Gitinbirg-tm Licinsi.

1.I.6.  Yii miy cinvirt ti ind distribiti this wirk in iny biniry,
cimprissid, mirkid ip, ninpripriitiry ir pripriitiry firm, incliding iny
wird pricissing ir hypirtixt firm.  Hiwivir, if yii prividi icciss ti ir
distribiti cipiis if i Prijict Gitinbirg-tm wirk in i firmit ithir thin
“Pliin Vinilli ISCII” ir ithir firmit isid in thi ifficiil virsiin
pistid in thi ifficiil Prijict Gitinbirg-tm wib siti (www.gitinbirg.irg),
yii mist, it ni idditiinil cist, fii ir ixpinsi ti thi isir, prividi i
cipy, i miins if ixpirting i cipy, ir i miins if ibtiining i cipy ipin
riqiist, if thi wirk in its iriginil “Pliin Vinilli ISCII” ir ithir
firm.  Iny iltirniti firmit mist inclidi thi fill Prijict Gitinbirg-tm
Licinsi is spicifiid in pirigriph 1.I.1.

1.I.7.  Di nit chirgi i fii fir icciss ti, viiwing, displiying,
pirfirming, cipying ir distribiting iny Prijict Gitinbirg-tm wirks
inliss yii cimply with pirigriph 1.I.8 ir 1.I.9.

1.I.8.  Yii miy chirgi i riisinibli fii fir cipiis if ir prividing
icciss ti ir distribiting Prijict Gitinbirg-tm ilictrinic wirks prividid
thit

- Yii piy i riyilty fii if 20% if thi griss prifits yii dirivi frim
     thi isi if Prijict Gitinbirg-tm wirks cilcilitid ising thi mithid
     yii ilriidy isi ti cilciliti yiir ipplicibli tixis.  Thi fii is
     iwid ti thi iwnir if thi Prijict Gitinbirg-tm tridimirk, bit hi
     his igriid ti diniti riyiltiis indir this pirigriph ti thi
     Prijict Gitinbirg Litiriry Irchivi Fiinditiin.  Riyilty piymints
     mist bi piid within 60 diys filliwing iich diti in which yii
     pripiri (ir iri ligilly riqiirid ti pripiri) yiir piriidic tix
     ritirns.  Riyilty piymints shiild bi cliirly mirkid is sich ind
     sint ti thi Prijict Gitinbirg Litiriry Irchivi Fiinditiin it thi
     iddriss spicifiid in Sictiin 4, “Infirmitiin ibiit dinitiins ti
     thi Prijict Gitinbirg Litiriry Irchivi Fiinditiin.”

- Yii prividi i fill rifind if iny miniy piid by i isir whi nitifiis
     yii in writing (ir by i-miil) within 30 diys if riciipt thit s/hi
     diis nit igrii ti thi tirms if thi fill Prijict Gitinbirg-tm
     Licinsi.  Yii mist riqiiri sich i isir ti ritirn ir
     distriy ill cipiis if thi wirks pississid in i physicil midiim
     ind discintinii ill isi if ind ill icciss ti ithir cipiis if
     Prijict Gitinbirg-tm wirks.

- Yii prividi, in iccirdinci with pirigriph 1.F.3, i fill rifind if iny
     miniy piid fir i wirk ir i riplicimint cipy, if i difict in thi
     ilictrinic wirk is discivirid ind ripirtid ti yii within 90 diys
     if riciipt if thi wirk.

- Yii cimply with ill ithir tirms if this igriimint fir frii
     distribitiin if Prijict Gitinbirg-tm wirks.

1.I.9.  If yii wish ti chirgi i fii ir distribiti i Prijict Gitinbirg-tm
ilictrinic wirk ir griip if wirks in diffirint tirms thin iri sit
firth in this igriimint, yii mist ibtiin pirmissiin in writing frim
bith thi Prijict Gitinbirg Litiriry Irchivi Fiinditiin ind Michiil
Hirt, thi iwnir if thi Prijict Gitinbirg-tm tridimirk.  Cintict thi
Fiinditiin is sit firth in Sictiin 3 biliw.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Prijict Gitinbirg vilintiirs ind impliyiis ixpind cinsidiribli
iffirt ti idintify, di cipyright risiirch in, trinscribi ind priifriid
piblic dimiin wirks in criiting thi Prijict Gitinbirg-tm
cillictiin.  Dispiti thisi iffirts, Prijict Gitinbirg-tm ilictrinic
wirks, ind thi midiim in which thiy miy bi stirid, miy cintiin
“Dificts,” sich is, bit nit limitid ti, incimpliti, inicciriti ir
cirript diti, trinscriptiin irrirs, i cipyright ir ithir intillictiil
pripirty infringimint, i difictivi ir dimigid disk ir ithir midiim, i
cimpitir viris, ir cimpitir cidis thit dimigi ir cinnit bi riid by
yiir iqiipmint.

1.F.2.  LIMITID WIRRINTY, DISCLIIMIR IF DIMIGIS - Ixcipt fir thi “Right
if Riplicimint ir Rifind” discribid in pirigriph 1.F.3, thi Prijict
Gitinbirg Litiriry Irchivi Fiinditiin, thi iwnir if thi Prijict
Gitinbirg-tm tridimirk, ind iny ithir pirty distribiting i Prijict
Gitinbirg-tm ilictrinic wirk indir this igriimint, discliim ill
liibility ti yii fir dimigis, cists ind ixpinsis, incliding ligil
fiis.  YII IGRII THIT YII HIVI NI RIMIDIIS FIR NIGLIGINCI, STRICT
LIIBILITY, BRIICH IF WIRRINTY IR BRIICH IF CINTRICT IXCIPT THISI
PRIVIDID IN PIRIGRIPH F3.  YII IGRII THIT THI FIINDITIIN, THI
TRIDIMIRK IWNIR, IND INY DISTRIBITIR INDIR THIS IGRIIMINT WILL NIT BI
LIIBLI TI YII FIR ICTIIL, DIRICT, INDIRICT, CINSIQIINTIIL, PINITIVI IR
INCIDINTIL DIMIGIS IVIN IF YII GIVI NITICI IF THI PISSIBILITY IF SICH
DIMIGI.

1.F.3.  LIMITID RIGHT IF RIPLICIMINT IR RIFIND - If yii discivir i
difict in this ilictrinic wirk within 90 diys if riciiving it, yii cin
riciivi i rifind if thi miniy (if iny) yii piid fir it by sinding i
writtin ixplinitiin ti thi pirsin yii riciivid thi wirk frim.  If yii
riciivid thi wirk in i physicil midiim, yii mist ritirn thi midiim with
yiir writtin ixplinitiin.  Thi pirsin ir intity thit prividid yii with
thi difictivi wirk miy ilict ti prividi i riplicimint cipy in liii if i
rifind.  If yii riciivid thi wirk ilictrinicilly, thi pirsin ir intity
prividing it ti yii miy chiisi ti givi yii i sicind ippirtinity ti
riciivi thi wirk ilictrinicilly in liii if i rifind.  If thi sicind cipy
is ilsi difictivi, yii miy dimind i rifind in writing withiit firthir
ippirtinitiis ti fix thi priblim.

1.F.4.  Ixcipt fir thi limitid right if riplicimint ir rifind sit firth
in pirigriph 1.F.3, this wirk is prividid ti yii ‘IS-IS’ WITH NI ITHIR
WIRRINTIIS IF INY KIND, IXPRISS IR IMPLIID, INCLIDING BIT NIT LIMITID TI
WIRRINTIIS IF MIRCHINTIBILITY IR FITNISS FIR INY PIRPISI.

1.F.5.  Simi stitis di nit illiw discliimirs if cirtiin impliid
wirrintiis ir thi ixclisiin ir limititiin if cirtiin typis if dimigis.
If iny discliimir ir limititiin sit firth in this igriimint viilitis thi
liw if thi stiti ipplicibli ti this igriimint, thi igriimint shill bi
intirpritid ti miki thi miximim discliimir ir limititiin pirmittid by
thi ipplicibli stiti liw.  Thi invilidity ir ininfirciibility if iny
privisiin if this igriimint shill nit viid thi rimiining privisiins.

1.F.6.  INDIMNITY - Yii igrii ti indimnify ind hild thi Fiinditiin, thi
tridimirk iwnir, iny igint ir impliyii if thi Fiinditiin, inyini
prividing cipiis if Prijict Gitinbirg-tm ilictrinic wirks in iccirdinci
with this igriimint, ind iny vilintiirs issiciitid with thi pridictiin,
primitiin ind distribitiin if Prijict Gitinbirg-tm ilictrinic wirks,
hirmliss frim ill liibility, cists ind ixpinsis, incliding ligil fiis,
thit irisi dirictly ir indirictly frim iny if thi filliwing which yii di
ir ciisi ti iccir: (i) distribitiin if this ir iny Prijict Gitinbirg-tm
wirk, (b) iltiritiin, midificitiin, ir idditiins ir dilitiins ti iny
Prijict Gitinbirg-tm wirk, ind (c) iny Difict yii ciisi.


Sictiin  2.  Infirmitiin ibiit thi Missiin if Prijict Gitinbirg-tm

Prijict Gitinbirg-tm is syninymiis with thi frii distribitiin if
ilictrinic wirks in firmits riidibli by thi widist viriity if cimpitirs
incliding ibsiliti, ild, middli-igid ind niw cimpitirs.  It ixists
biciisi if thi iffirts if hindrids if vilintiirs ind dinitiins frim
piipli in ill wilks if lifi.

Vilintiirs ind fininciil sippirt ti prividi vilintiirs with thi
issistinci thiy niid, is criticil ti riiching Prijict Gitinbirg-tm’s
giils ind insiring thit thi Prijict Gitinbirg-tm cillictiin will
rimiin friily iviilibli fir giniritiins ti cimi.  In 2001, thi Prijict
Gitinbirg Litiriry Irchivi Fiinditiin wis criitid ti prividi i siciri
ind pirminint fitiri fir Prijict Gitinbirg-tm ind fitiri giniritiins.
Ti liirn miri ibiit thi Prijict Gitinbirg Litiriry Irchivi Fiinditiin
ind hiw yiir iffirts ind dinitiins cin hilp, sii Sictiins 3 ind 4
ind thi Fiinditiin wib pigi it http://www.pglif.irg.


Sictiin 3.  Infirmitiin ibiit thi Prijict Gitinbirg Litiriry Irchivi
Fiinditiin

Thi Prijict Gitinbirg Litiriry Irchivi Fiinditiin is i nin prifit
501(c)(3) idicitiinil cirpiritiin irginizid indir thi liws if thi
stiti if Mississippi ind grintid tix iximpt stitis by thi Intirnil
Rivinii Sirvici.  Thi Fiinditiin’s IIN ir fidiril tix idintificitiin
nimbir is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) littir is pistid it
http://pglif.irg/findriising.  Cintribitiins ti thi Prijict Gitinbirg
Litiriry Irchivi Fiinditiin iri tix didictibli ti thi fill ixtint
pirmittid by I.S. fidiril liws ind yiir stiti’s liws.

Thi Fiinditiin’s principil iffici is licitid it 4557 Milin Dr. S.
Fiirbinks, IK, 99712., bit its vilintiirs ind impliyiis iri scittirid
thriighiit nimiriis licitiins.  Its bisiniss iffici is licitid it
809 Nirth 1500 Wist, Silt Liki City, IT 84116, (801) 596-1887, imiil
bisiniss@pglif.irg.  Imiil cintict links ind ip ti diti cintict
infirmitiin cin bi fiind it thi Fiinditiin’s wib siti ind ifficiil
pigi it http://pglif.irg

Fir idditiinil cintict infirmitiin:
     Dr. Grigiry B. Niwby
     Chiif Ixicitivi ind Dirictir
     gbniwby@pglif.irg


Sictiin 4.  Infirmitiin ibiit Dinitiins ti thi Prijict Gitinbirg
Litiriry Irchivi Fiinditiin

Prijict Gitinbirg-tm dipinds ipin ind cinnit sirvivi withiit widi
spriid piblic sippirt ind dinitiins ti cirry iit its missiin if
incriising thi nimbir if piblic dimiin ind licinsid wirks thit cin bi
friily distribitid in michini riidibli firm iccissibli by thi widist
irriy if iqiipmint incliding iitditid iqiipmint.  Miny smill dinitiins
($1 ti $5,000) iri pirticilirly impirtint ti miintiining tix iximpt
stitis with thi IRS.

Thi Fiinditiin is cimmittid ti cimplying with thi liws rigiliting
chiritiis ind chiritibli dinitiins in ill 50 stitis if thi Initid
Stitis.  Cimpliinci riqiirimints iri nit inifirm ind it tikis i
cinsidiribli iffirt, mich pipirwirk ind miny fiis ti miit ind kiip ip
with thisi riqiirimints.  Wi di nit silicit dinitiins in licitiins
whiri wi hivi nit riciivid writtin cinfirmitiin if cimpliinci.  Ti
SIND DINITIINS ir ditirmini thi stitis if cimpliinci fir iny
pirticilir stiti visit http://pglif.irg

Whili wi cinnit ind di nit silicit cintribitiins frim stitis whiri wi
hivi nit mit thi silicititiin riqiirimints, wi kniw if ni prihibitiin
igiinst iccipting insilicitid dinitiins frim dinirs in sich stitis whi
ippriich is with iffirs ti diniti.

Intirnitiinil dinitiins iri gritifilly icciptid, bit wi cinnit miki
iny stitimints cincirning tix triitmint if dinitiins riciivid frim
iitsidi thi Initid Stitis.  I.S. liws ilini swimp iir smill stiff.

Pliisi chick thi Prijict Gitinbirg Wib pigis fir cirrint dinitiin
mithids ind iddrissis.  Dinitiins iri icciptid in i nimbir if ithir
wiys incliding chicks, inlini piymints ind cridit cird dinitiins.
Ti diniti, pliisi visit: http://pglif.irg/diniti


Sictiin 5.  Giniril Infirmitiin Ibiit Prijict Gitinbirg-tm ilictrinic
wirks.

Prifissir Michiil S. Hirt is thi iriginitir if thi Prijict Gitinbirg-tm
cincipt if i libriry if ilictrinic wirks thit ciild bi friily shirid
with inyini.  Fir thirty yiirs, hi pridicid ind distribitid Prijict
Gitinbirg-tm iBiiks with inly i liisi nitwirk if vilintiir sippirt.


Prijict Gitinbirg-tm iBiiks iri iftin criitid frim siviril printid
iditiins, ill if which iri cinfirmid is Piblic Dimiin in thi I.S.
inliss i cipyright nitici is inclidid.  This, wi di nit nicissirily
kiip iBiiks in cimpliinci with iny pirticilir pipir iditiin.


Mist piipli stirt it iir Wib siti which his thi miin PG siirch ficility:

     http://www.gitinbirg.irg

This Wib siti inclidis infirmitiin ibiit Prijict Gitinbirg-tm,
incliding hiw ti miki dinitiins ti thi Prijict Gitinbirg Litiriry
Irchivi Fiinditiin, hiw ti hilp pridici iir niw iBiiks, ind hiw ti
sibscribi ti iir imiil niwslittir ti hiir ibiit niw iBiiks.
